if you're going to dominate and do
things that others consider impossible
you're going to have to become capable
of what others aren't namely discipline
you will have to relentlessly cut things
out of your life for every one person
that manages to generate success while
regularly drinking alcohol smoking weed
stuffing their face full of sugar
there's a 100,000 people that become too
inefficient to succeed today human
optimization expert Gary Brea and I
discuss the one true path to
winning Gary Brea welcome to the show
great to be here man it's great to have
you so basically everybody has some kind
of addiction whether it's alcohol sugar
social media weed any number of things
right uh and even if it's not bad enough
to require you to go to rehab it is
going to be bad enough to slow you down
such that you're stuck in a pattern of
mediocrity assuming that you agree with
that I do agree with that that's it's
the first time I've ever said heard
somebody say that everyone has some form
of addiction but I agree with you
probably not for the reason you think
but I do agree with you all right give
people your most compelling argument as
to why those things are probably worse
than they think well because um you know
we used to say in the mortality space
and I was a mortality researcher for 22
years that the absence of dopamine is
the presence of
addiction and if you look for example at
sugar addiction um most people are not
liking the taste of sugar yes we like
the sweet taste of sugar the truth is
most of us don't like sugar addicted to
sugar and why is that because when we
eat sweets um we actually get a dopamine
reward right we get an actual little
enderin um reward if you look at the
most addiction the history of most
addiction if you've ever been an addict
or you've known a true addict addiction
has a tendency to shift and not really
ever go away alcoholics become drug
addicts drug addicts become Workaholics
Workaholics become Workaholics
Workaholics become gamblers so why does
addiction have a tendency to shift
because you can cure the physical
addiction but the dopamine deficiency
drives the behavior like serotonin is
one of the main drivers of mood dopamine
is one of the main drivers of behavior
it's why I often say you show me a child
that can play video games for 14 hours a
day I'll show you a future addict right
they're generally not playing the video
game because they they like the video
game they're playing the video game
because it makes them feel normal in
fact most addiction does not begin with
the search for getting banged up you
know most add didn't wake up one day and
go I want to get really banged up they
woke up one day and said I want to feel
normal and it was a search for normaly
that led to an addiction and then once
they had a physical addiction now
they're running from a low they're not
running towards a high right if you talk
to a true Al alcoholic a true drug drug
addict very often that habit is
continuing because they do not want to
go off the the that cavernous hole
that's right behind them and it's not
that they are any longer chasing chasing
that high so I do agree with you you
know a lot of people have a dopamine
deficiency which drives different types
of addictive behavior and we have
addictive behaviors that we would
consider healthy addictions right I mean
when I was a triathlete I was never a
professional triathlete but I was a very
competitive amateur triathlete I would
say that 35 or 40% of the guys that I
raced with were recovering addicts of
one form or another so this was their
new Addiction you know centuries 100
mile bike rides two and half mile swims
13 Mile runs you know this was their new
addiction and they were psycho committed
to it I know there's people that are
going to listen to this and they will
not like the fact that I use the word
Addiction the reason that I use that is
I think that there are things that we do
habitually so from a the classic
definition of an addict of somebody who
will do something even in the face of it
absolutely destroying their lives right
I think that there's a for the people
that watch this show there's probably a
higher likelihood that they have a
different a different avenue of thing
that is softening the quality of their
life and those are the things that I
want to call out and see map sort of
your thinking around this so when I
think about alcohol use there's a lot of
people that they can do it without it
being addictive like I don't have an
addictive personality right but when I
go in on something I go way in on that
thing and so I know people will go
through a party phase so I'm always when
people come to me and say Hey I want to
be an entrepreneur I'm like amazing if
you really want that though you're going
to have to sell your 20s so most people
are going to sell their 20s to partying
if you want to be an entrepreneur you're
going to have to quote unquote sell your
20s to that so you're going to have to
be in skill acquisition going hard okay
and so if you've got somebody that comes
home every day and they're smoking weed
they're going out you know Thursday
Friday Saturday drinking uh I have no
moral problem with that whatsoever but
in terms of if you want to do something
EX extraordinary with your life those
two things are incompatible I totally
agree with you I mean the passion has
got to be greater than the problem right
so if that's the problem your passion
has to just far outweigh I mean that
that's not even a consideration any
longer right I mean you know I feel
extraordinarily blessed because I I feel
like through God's grace one way or
another I found a career that I would
otherwise do for free and and somehow
monetized it so it never feels like work
to me like this doesn't feel like work
to me right now I'm pumped to be here
I'm excited about this conversation um
when this is over I can't wait to get to
the next meeting the next conversation
the next client to talk about the next
issue because I'm just almost possessed
by it and when I'm done the end of the
day I'll spend two or three hours
reading peer reviewed science or looking
at a journal article or watching a
podcast on you know one of my mentors to
try to further educate myself like I
can't get enough of it and I think a lot
of times that you know when people say I
want to be an entrepreneur they I think
they really want to be
rich um it's not that they really want
to be an entrepreneur um because
that's it took me 45 years to figure
that out I I spent you know the better
part of my life until my early 40s being
very inauthentic and really desperately
wanting to be wealthy and I was very
good at what I did I was a mortality
expert insurance industry but I was
spending my entire time
predicting how soon people were going to
die
you know and predicting death to the
month and and allowing myself to believe
that that weren't you know that this was
just data and I I couldn't have any
effect on it and these were just numbers
and this was just a spreadsheet and I
didn't cause it and it wasn't my
responsibility to get people out of this
it just my responsibility to Crunch the
data and really kind of all I cared
about at the time was I just so
desperately wanted to be wealthy and I
had a major capitulation in my life you
know when I realized that there were
human beings on the other other side of
these spreadsheets and that this wasn't
just data and when I left that industry
and started focusing on people's
well-being and stopped focusing on
becoming
wealthy I
became
wealthy um and and now my focus isn't on
wealth it's on well-being and the wealth
just seems to keep coming and so I think
I think it's an interesting way that the
Universe works so as somebody that has
literally switched the direction of your
life to help people with their
well-being what is it about some of the
most common vices like drinking or weed
smoking or whatever that have become
really just you get a pass in culture if
you do those things or even some of it
quite frankly is encouraged um what is
it about those things that's going to
damage somebody's whether it's mental
Fitness as you call it or just metabolic
Health you've talked a lot about oxygen
transportation and mitochondria like are
devic that really mess people up are
they things that mess with oxygen
Transportation like what what or do you
think that that's not true and people
can drink and um stay up late and um do
recreational drugs I'm not talking about
somebody who's like shooting heroin but
I'm saying the ones that like culturally
people are like yeah no there's no big
deal um do you think there are a big
deal um well number one I think they're
a big deal and I think they're a big
deal because your purpose isn't big
enough right because if the purpose is
big enough then that stuff pales so far
in comparison that you know like
anything that would take me off my game
even momentarily and I think you get a
pass in in society for it sure but if we
go really to the root cause of this or
or the root drivers of this like if you
said to me Gary what is a mood what is
an emotional state like what is it
what's happiness what's Elation passion
Joy arousal what is libido I mean what
actually are they in the human body well
they're collections of neurotransmitters
right like a recipe um bound to to
oxygen at least the elevated emotional
states are so if you think about for
example all of the elevated emotional
states passion Elation Joy or rouso
libido kind of all the hell yeah I won
the lottery
emotions they all have one thing in
common they have oxygen as a part of
their molecular structure all right this
is this is why nobody has ever woken up
laughing right you haven't woken no one
no human being is ever woken out of a
deep sleep laughing why because you
don't have the oxidative state to
experience laughter but can you wake up
angry sure I mean if you want to do a
really cool experiment tonight just
pinch your spouse while she's in a deep
sleeve it sounds like a very bad idea
Gary yeah no I said you do the
experiment not me that see that's why
I'm using you as the guinea pig Tom um
but and and why is it that's because
anger and despair and jealousy and
resentment these are very low not only
they low frequency emotion emotions but
they're low oxidative emotions right so
they don't require an elevated oxidative
state
and so very often what happens is people
have a hard time maintaining elevated
emotional states so they reach elevated
emotional states like a heart monitor
right not like Rolling Hills where they
can stay in in in an elevated mood for a
prolong period of time but they reach it
like a heart monitor and they fall and
why is that it's because their
physiology drags them into the state
where it most comfortably exists so now
it is harder to push yourself into these
emotional states one of the ways to get
there is drugs and alcohol one of the
ways to get there is like um promiscuity
or like dramatic activity right um
shocking activity that actually gets you
into that emotional state you try to
hold on to it and it falls and this is
why lots of people will spend a lifetime
doing the right things like trying to
journal pray they develop a morning
routine they try to focus on positive
thinking they go to the right seminars
they try to put themselves in the right
rooms and they can't seem to maintain
that elevated emotional state it's
because their
physiology is dragging them back down
into the state where you most
comfortably exist and so now if we talk
about well what are some of these
recipes like well what is happiness and
and this is an exact recipe but let's
say happiness is so much nor Ben so much
epine so much dopamine so much serotonin
boom you have the emotion happiness okay
well what if you have an issue in the
gut just methylating one of those
neurotransmitters right so take
serotonin for example 90% of the serot
in our bodies is right here so crazy if
you don't have it here you can't have it
here so very often the absence of
something certain emotional states
doesn't begin in the outside environment
like anxiety rarely begins in your
outside environment it almost always
begins with your physiology and you can
prove this so let's say for example that
you're having a difficult time
methylating serotonin what does that
mean it means turning an amino acid
called tryptophan into the
neurotransmitter serotonin or dopamine
the main driver of behavior turning
phenol alanine and tyrosine into the
neurotransmitter dopamine well you don't
have a mood disorder you don't have a
mental illness you are missing a raw
material that's required to assemble
certain emotional states it's just like
going to a bakery chef and saying listen
you could bake whatever you want you
just can't use butter okay well it
doesn't sound like a big deal right um
you know it's only one ingredient but if
you think of the number of recipes that
that would affect cookies pastries pies
brownies you know what have you just by
removing that one ingredient it's no
different than going to a human being
and saying you can be in whatever
emotional state you want you just can't
use
serotonin okay well that just wiped out
a whole tier of emotion and that's why
you
know part of my message is about
physiology and diet and what we can do
to naturally restore proper methylation
of neurotransmitters the creation of
these neurotransmitters so they are
readily available for us to assemble
mood so we don't have deficits that
cause us to seek the types of behaviors
that short-term Spike those moods dude I
love that I have said many many many
times on this show that I want my
Tombstone to read no no no not I didn't
say that what I what I've said many many
times is on my Tombstone I wanted to say
you're having a biological experience
and the reason that I bring this whole
thing up is that I think people fail to
understand that they're having a
biological experience that they're going
to experience their entire life through
the lens of how they're maintaining
their biology
and any I'll call it a vice but like I
don't even think of it like that any
anything that you're doing whether it's
just for fun you're going out to hang
out with your friends you're having
drinks because drinking makes me feel
like I'm suppressing the urge to dance
on a table it feels awesome like it is a
wonderful feeling and if it didn't have
negative consequences to me from a
longevity perspective from an ability to
think clearly perspective I would do it
a lot I have no moral problem with it
whatsoever right but you're having a
biologic experience and once people
understand that life is you trying to
modulate your brain States M that's it
like you're playing with your emotions
why do you go watch a movie because it
plays with your emotions in a way that
we find pleasurable why do you play a
video game because it plays with your
neurological State dude I have seen
videos of a moose getting drunk on
fermented apples that have fallen off
the tree or whatever they were it it is
just hardwired in animals to modulate
their own neurochemistry this is exactly
why we do drugs why I say that people
have addictions and though most people
will not think of them as addictions
you're trying to fiddle with the knobs
on your brain like that's what this game
is and so I'm saying hey word you're
going to fiddle with your knobs we all
are be very careful that the knobs that
you're fiddling with do not create a
state where either you're constantly
chasing something so you don't feel good
right so you have low energy and you're
chasing just feeling normal or you are
getting to the point where you have
brain fog and you can't think clearly
because you've gone out and you've pared
and you don't realize how long that
takes to really get out of your system
right I mean just on and on and on
people are doing things my own battle
with anxiety this is one of the things
that made me so eager to have you on the
show I am utterly convinced that the not
not the sum total but the vast majority
of my anxiety is Diet related every time
I figure out a piece of that puzzle I'm
like Oh my anxiety now has gotten less
gotten less gotten less and so getting
people to understand the things you do
are going to matter a lot and if you're
watching this channel the odds are that
you're trying to do something
extraordinary in your life and I'm
telling you right now as much as dude if
you've never smoked weed and had sex it
is a different sport it is amazing I
love it the most yeah but because it has
in I get this is going to be very
controversial for me it if I try to do
it frequently I I just I'm so lethargic
is probably the right word I just don't
feel sharp I don't feel sharp and if you
are not at the razor's edge of your
abilities you will never be able to do
anything extraordinary and you're not
going to be at the razor's edge of your
ability unless you're doing all kinds of
things to optimize your physiology
couldn't agree with you more in fact you
know when we when you look at anxiety
for example um when you ask most people
what anxiety is they describe the
emotional state of anxiety right a fear
of the future um a fear fear of
anxiousness or they describe situations
that they're in that actually can
generate these fears right and true
situational anxi anxiety does exist but
if you want to prove that anxiety is
coming from your physiology and not from
your outside emotion you got to ask
yourself these three questions or ask
somebody that you know that's suffering
from anxiety these three questions and
what you'll find is that it's actually
not coming from their outside
environment what we usually call cluster
of symptoms it's it's coming from their
physiology and if you don't address the
physiological root then all you're left
with are coping mechanisms
right the majority of what's available
to people with anxiety are coping
mechanisms right diazapam olium nitrate
you know volume Xanax um therapy
counseling which I am not poo pooing by
any stretch I think people that get
counseling or therapy actually it's a
sign of strength not a sign of weakness
but what I'm saying is rather than learn
to cope with what you have why don't you
dig in and get rid of it because if you
take another layer deeper and you say
okay have I had an xiety on and off
throughout my entire lifetime you ask
most people that suffer from Che anxiety
they'll say yes I've had it in one form
or fashion on and off throughout my
entire lifetime there's your first
science coming from your physiology very
likely coming from a gene mutation
called
MTHFR which between 44 and 60% of the
population has which is directly why I
agree with you that diet has a massive
impact on anxiety because methyl folate
has a massive impact on anxiety um and
if you ask him a second question um can
you point to the specific trigger that
causes it I mean every time you start to
feel anxiety can you point to the
specific trigger that causes it the
majority of time they'll say no and the
third question is well if you've ever
tried anti-anxiety medications have they
worked and most of the time they'll say
no it just makes me feel like a zombie
there's a dead indication that is coming
from your physiology so now if we take
it another step deeper and we say well
then what is it in my physiology that is
causing me to feel this way well there's
a category of neurotransmitters in your
brain um and other areas of your body um
that's called catacol amines and catacol
meines are fight ORF flight
neurotransmitters right norepinephrine
epinephrine dopamine fedrin which we
also call
Adrenaline so these are fight ORF flight
neurotransmitters and understand that um
the brain as sophisticated as we'd like
to think it is it's it's actually not
the brain is actually very Primal what
the brain cares about is the brain cares
about survival and so so if you for
example drove home tonight and you got
out of your car and somebody was
standing in front of you with a knife
okay that's a very real fear your pupils
would dilate your heart rate would
increase your extremities would flood
with blood you would start having a
fight ORF flight response which is a
flood of catacol amines into the brain
and this could save your life right
you're instantly prepared to fight or
flight uh your field the vision wired um
widens your your hearing gets more cute
which is why people that suffer from
anxiety also don't like a lot of bright
lights that usually like loud music they
don't like a lot of stuff going on a lot
of sensory input right because cataca
means heighten that awareness State you
can actually pick these catac colomines
up in the urine of people that are
having anxiety urinary catacol meines
are directly related to the state of
anxiety
so first of all we know the cacom are
released into the brain but what if I
wasn't driving home and and getting out
of my car and having somebody stand in
front of me with a knife what if I was
just laying in my bed here in Los
Angeles um and we're pretty far up to
Hill here it's pretty pretty nasty W you
drive getting here and you started
thinking about getting eaten by a shark
so you're laying in your bed here at the
top of this hill and you start thinking
about getting eaten by a shark the
chances of a shark getting out of that
Pacific Ocean and making it up that even
if it got an Uber making it up that road
into your bed and biting you are zero
have you not seen shark NATO Gary I I
can we really say it's zero
is I said are almost zero I'll Grant you
you never you never know that you know
maybe maybe the sharks in you know out
in California can call an Uber I don't
know shark Cooper oh God that's let's
not try comedy on here I'll stick to
science my point is that you're in a
very real visceral threatening situation
somebody in front of you with a knife
and you're an entirely perceived
imagined situation laying in your bed
thinking about getting eaten by a shark
but you can have the exact same response
pupils dilate heart rate increases
extremities flood with blood hearing
gets more acute pupilary Vision dilates
you can have the exact same response and
why is that because the same physiologic
root a dump of catacol amines into the
brain so if we even take it a step
further and we say well are there people
that have impaired catacol amine
regulation that have an impaired ability
to downregulate catacol amines yes about
35% of the population has a genetic
mutation called compt CT catacol othl
transferase if you have this gene
mutation you have it's possible that you
have very slow breakdown of catac
colomines which means that these fight
ORF flight neurotransmitters can rise in
your brain very slowly but eventually
they trigger a state of anxiety you're
not actually fearing you're not having a
feeling of anxiety you're having a
feeling of heightened catacol amines in
the Brain Trust Me cold plunging is
amazing it is all it is hyped up to be
leis and I both do this all the time and
if you have one of the beautiful tubs
from plunge you really can train your
mind while you train your body to adapt
to uncomfortable situations with every
plunge get in the cold water Center
yourself get focused it is amazing the
way that it will toughen your mind and
the great news is the Sleek ones from
plunge have amazing Tech that makes it
super fast and easy to set up you can
use them indoors or outdoors with no
Plumbing required build your resilience
get tough and be able to tackle
difficult problems just go to plunge.
comom and use the code impact to get
$150 off your incredible cold plunge tub
today again that's code impact for
$150 off your purchase at plunge. comom
or you can find the link in the show
notes and the same thing happens when
these people lay down to go to sleep at
night right people generally people that
suffer from this type of gene mutation
will lay down and go to bed at night and
as their environment quiets their mind
will wake up and they'll tell you I'm
body tired but I'm mind awake I just lay
there and I think about the most
innocuous little thoughts like nothing
that couldn't wait till the next day
right they're like you know did I get
everything on my grocery list did my
belt match my shoes you know did I
return that email sometimes they and
sometimes they'll just wonder you know
if I had a Thanksgiving Day party what
color dishes would I use and then and
then they can catch themselves and go
the hell am I thinking about
Thanksgiving Day dishes before it's 2
o'clock in the morning because your mind
is awake your body is tired your mind is
awake so what if you could restore and
you can through proper supplementation
which also comes from proper diet so
what downregulates catacol amines things
like the proper B vitamin balance
methylfolate the a complex of B vitamins
specifically the types of B vitamins
that are found naturally in nature like
hydroxycobalamin methylcobalamin and um
a denol Calin those things that are
found in green leafy vegetables
grass-fed Meats um you know um eggs and
cruciferous vegetables those have high
amounts of folate B vitamins very
bioavailable forms and so now the body
has the raw material to break down
catacol amines which is why diet can
affect the incidence of anxiety it's the
way it's why some people can take
certain methylated vitamins and their
anxiety goes into permanent or
semi-permanent remission they go holy
[__] I didn't think it could be that
easy it is if you understand human
physiology okay so I have a hypothesis
that there is a
relatively um small basket of things
that people do on a pretty regular basis
that cause maximum damage I'll give you
a couple examples and then give me your
basket so uh if you let me pull a few
levers in somebody's life I think I can
change it forever and for the better
I'm going to control their sleep I'm
going to control their access to the Sun
and if I'm going to stop at 3 uh I would
control their sugar intake their blood
glucose levels is actually what I would
steer by yeah there's a few more that
are pretty high impact but I'll stop
there what do you agree that there is a
in terms of common that there's a
relatively small basket and if so what's
in the basket I would first of all I
would absolutely believe um those three
um are are certainly in the top five I
might add two more but um yes you know
what's interesting I I was just talking
to my wife about this as I sort of
travel around the world I meet with you
know some of the world's leading
anti-aging longevity biohacking experts
I mean you know a lot of these
researchers that are doing fascinating
things in gene therapy um I go to a lot
of Retreats and events what's really
astounding Tom is that the the science
of Bio optimization is coming full
circle
meaning we're just getting back to the
basics which is exactly what you're
saying forget the fancy you know
equipment um you know forget this rare
Amazon rout that this company has that's
patent and licensed and trademarked and
it you know they skin it and boil it and
dry it and this is the secret Elixir
life it's back to the basics the further
we get away from the basics the sicker
we become can you break out what are the
basics so the basics are what we get
from Mother Nature which are three
things we get um light from the sun so
I'm completely with you on light um we
get oxygen from the air most of us are
not breathing properly anymore sedentary
lifestyle is the leading cause of all
cause mortality we're not moving we're
not getting enough oxygen into our
bodies which is why I'm a huge fan of
breath work in the morning um and we're
not touching the surface of the Earth
you know the whole time I've been
researching you I'm like Jesus I never
and I mean never and Barefoot unless I'm
on vacation which is like once a year oh
you need to get a pemf mat yeah or start
touching the surface of the Earth you
know that's too far away it's it's right
outside your door not really will my
driveway count my driveway is artificial
grass oh you don't have any grass on the
side we have like one little patch I
wondered if that would count yeah
because you don't need to move just
touch how but how deep does that have to
be like I'm sure it's sitting over tanks
and things like that so it's not mean
look you can get a g meter and check it
but I mean most soil dirt grass sand is
perfect if not you you when when people
are like oh I don't don't want to buy
all this fancy equipment there's no
fancy equipment you have to buy if you
can touch the surface of the Earth if
for whatever reason you can't touch the
surface of the Earth and invest in
something like a p MFM pulse
electromagnetic field that puts low gous
current through the body and mimics the
magnetic field of the earth so those are
those are some of the basics you know um
sunlight um breathing oxygen and
contacting the surface of the Earth and
I am absolutely with you the the the
third or fourth would be gly IA control
blood sugar control sugar is the root of
all evil the Bible should say sugar is
the root of all evil not the love a
bunny right because I don't think people
are dying because they love money but
they are dying from blood sugar and in
my entire is it just that they're
overeating sugar makes them overeat and
that's the problem or sugar itself even
in small quantities is going to be
problematic it's the fact that sugar is
hidden in everything now you know our
our sugar consumption since 1964 has
gone up 400 fold not not 400 you know
it's gone up because it's in everything
and then we had a massive war in the 90s
on on on fat which was like the worst
thing that ever happened to the food
pyramid was to have this massive war on
on on fats in general and saturated fats
and and you know natural oils and you
know we started to replace everything
with processed foods and sugars which
really spike your insulin and you know
we know now for example that a lot of um
mental and PSY atric illness has its
root in blood sugar for example you know
we know now that
Alzheimer's disease is Type 3 diabetes
it's insulin resistance in the brain
right I mean the brain is so crack
addicted to Sugar that it secretes its
own insulin right most most even even
Physicians think no the pancreas is the
only place the beta cells the eyelets
and the pancreas is the only place that
insulin's made that's not true the brain
makes its own insulin it is crack
addicted to sugar and when the brain
wants sugar the brain gets sugar right
the brain's nasty it's like a little IM
Jong-un of dictators it just sits up
there and it takes everything for itself
if it wants calcium it'll leech it from
the bones if it wants amino acids it'll
strip it from lean muscle and if it
wants sugar it'll activate a receptor on
the back of the tongue called the rf12
receptor which also provides a dopamine
ding for giving it sugar but the trick
is you have to swallow right so in order
we we swallow these sweet products and
it gives us a dopamine reward in fact if
you look at the Genesis of most
artificial sweet sweeteners only a
fraction of the chemical sweetener is
actually designed to meet the taste of
the sweetener the entirety of the rest
of those chemicals are designed to ding
the dopamine receptor wow which is why
artificial sweeteners are so addictive
it's why you know people that drink 12
um I'm not saying you know but most of
us know somebody they'll drink like six
eight 10 um you know Diet Cokes in a day
I used to drink three full sized cans of
Monster Zero Calorie zero calorie but
arici sweeners out the ass uh plus one
to three diet CES that was obviously
Peak anxiety I didn't yet understand
that diet could play a role in that uh
yeah the bad news is I got lean as hell
it was awesome and it was how I managed
my hunger and PS they taste amazing yeah
uh but this is my whole thesis is that
you're getting one thing out of all
these things you do that damage your
physiology but if you understand that
there's like a trade-off like like
Monday through Friday I don't allow
myself to drink diet coke on Saturday
I'll have half a Diet Coke and on Sunday
I'll have half a Diet Coke not because I
think it's good for me because I think
it tastes good right uh but because I
understand that there's a knock on
effect of everything I put in my mouth
or don't put in my mouth or on my skin
or you know on and on uh you start to do
a different calculus and that calculus
that I think is so important to
understand if you're trying to really
optimize right I I couldn't I couldn't
agree with you more and and the truth is
that most of us are walking around at
about 50 or 60% of our true state of
normal and and we are very likely just a
few nutrients away from being completely
optimal but we just don't know what
those nutrients are you want to talk
about magic things happening in the
human body magic happens in the human
body when you give it the raw material
it needs to do its job and if we start
with the understanding the very truthful
understanding that there's not a single
compound known to mankind not one
there's no vitamin no mineral no amino
acid no protein no carbohydrate of any
kind that we put into the human body
that's used in the format that we put it
in without a single exception everything
that enters our body has to be refined
into the usable form it goes salt even
salt yeah sodium sodium chloride NAC is
not used in the in the sodium chloride
form it's actually broken that molecule
was broken down and put into different
physiological reactions if you look at
the way the mitochondria uses water for
example it breaks off the hydrogens and
it breaks off the oxygen the oxygen goes
into one side of the CB cycle the
hydrogen's bind to NAD plus and reduce
it to nadh and then it enters the um
kreb cycle and electron transport chain
so everything that enters our body you
eat a piece of chicken the chicken is
useless until it's broken down into
amino acids you in ingest folate or
folic acid it's useless until your body
turns it into methola
this process in human beings is called
methylation we do it the process of
turning something into its constituent
Parts yes into methylation was marking
DNA no so methylation is also called one
carbon metabolism so basically what
methylation is I liken it to pulling
crude oil out of the ground right so we
take crude oil out of the ground but we
can't put crude oil into our gas tank
right because the car doesn't understand
that fuel source crude oil has to be
refined into gasoline now the car can
operate human beings are no different we
put all kinds of nutrients vitamins
minerals amino acids into the human body
and the human body takes them and
converts them into the usable form if
you can't make this conversion you have
a deficiency and it is this deficiency
that is robbing us from being in a state
of optimization it's this deficiency
that leads to some of the most common
conditions conditions that we call call
genetically inherited disease um you
know the whole the whole concept of
genetically inherited disease is is in
my opinion such a fallacy yes there are
rare conditions that are true diseases
that are passed from generation to
generation but why is it that 85% of all
hypertension is idiopathic meaning of
Unknown Origin and we say well Tom
you're um your you know grandmother and
your mom's side had hypertension your um
father and your grandfather had
hypertension now you have hyper tension
so you have familial hypertension you
have genetically inherited hypertension
if a doctor said that to me I would say
well what Gene did I inherit that gave
me that hypertension because they
wouldn't be able to tell me because that
Gene doesn't
exist okay so I'll push on that one so
the gene might exist but not be known it
could be a Confluence of 150 Gene
interactions or it could be Modern Life
that was one of the big questions I want
to ask you so going through the research
with you
that was the question I kept wondering
is this all like at a generic level for
me because I don't have the the depth of
medical knowledge that you have but when
I look at it I'm just like oh we're at
of step with how we came up from an
evolutionary standpoint there's just too
many things that are off like the fact
that I never walk on the ground right
and so if Nature has assumed whoa you're
going to be um in constant contact with
the Earth and there's going to be
whatever ion transfer I don't know
what's actually happening but whatever
that is I can
right and now that it's not happening
things just start to knock on and
there's hundred things like that like
hey I didn't expect you to drink diet
sodas because those did not exist from
an evolutionary standpoint and now any
one soda doesn't matter but yeah it
starts to build up exactly so is this a
DNA thing that we need to understand
like hey Tom you have the MTHFR mutation
and you're not processing folate
correctly or is it just that Modern Life
Is So anathema to the way that we
evolved that this really is about going
back to the basics like you well I think
you know if in in a perfect world you'd
go back to the basics right sunlight
grounding breath work um uh you know you
know being in regular contact with the
Earth not eating processed foods eating
Whole Foods in fact my whole theory on
dieting is not vegan vegetarian keto
paleo carnivore it's a whole food diet
right eating it's usually not the food
itself it's the distance from the food
to the table you know I just got
censored all over Instagram for doing a
whole post on seed oils and I said that
industrial process seed oils were bad
for you and people just came out of the
woodwork seed oils are not bad for you
and I said well listen if you take a
canola plant and you put it in a
commercial press and it comes out gummy
and then you de gum it with hexane which
is a no neurotoxin and then you heat
that oil to 405 degrees and turn it
rancid and then you take that Rancid
neurotoxic oil and you and you deodorize
it with sodium hydroxide which is a
known
carcinogen now it's toxic yeah maybe the
original C cold press canola plant
wasn't going to harm you but it's the
distance from there to your table right
it's the industrial processing that
harms you but back to that process of
methylation you know there you could go
down the role of genetic science until
you know your eyes rolled back in your
head but there are five major genes of
methylation
mtfr
MTR
mtrr one called ahcy and one called
compt if you got a genetic test and you
looked at which if any of those genes
were operating and which ones are not
operating whether they were broken or
not and you simply supplemented for
their
deficiency my hypothesis is it would get
you 85 to 90% of the way to where you
want to be and it would pull so many
anchors up off of your Stern it would be
absurd anx xiety anxiousness ADD ADHD
OCD manic depression bipolar poor gut
issues poor sleep waking mind poor focus
and concentration these all come from a
lack of very specific nutrients in your
body and most of us do not have clean
enough diet and a clean enough um fuel
sources like the water that we're
drinking to get there without
supplementation I mean my I believe
everybody should be on a good methylated
multivitamin meaning don't worry about
whether or not your body can break
something down into the usable form feed
it the usable form right so in other
words don't take folic acid take
methylfolate don't take cyanocobalamin
take methylcobalamin so a good
methylated multivitamin would fill in
those gaps and give your body the raw
material that it needs to do its job in
the absence of going out and actually
getting a genetic test done which I I
think everybody should do once in their
lifetime because it your genes never
change um then you can begin to
supplement for deficiency instead of
just the sake of supplementing right
there's lots of incredibly good
supplements out there ashwag Ganda and
CoQ10 and St John's Ward and and and all
kinds you know vitamin C I can make an
argument for vitamin C you can make an
argument for all of these different
supplements but the question is does
your body need them and how do you know
you have to know what your body can
process and what it can't and as soon as
you know that piece of information now
you supplement for deficiency and watch
the magic happen and this will affect
you know it's this process of
methylation Tom is almost like the The
Hub of a wheel with a whole bunch of
spokes right so people with anxiety
usually have three other conditions that
they don't link to their anxiety right
they have um poor sleep right they have
a hard time falling asleep because their
mind keeps them awake or they fall
asleep and they have and they wake up at
night and they have a hard time going
back to sleep me because their mind
wakes them up um almost every person
that suffers from um rampant anxiety
also has gut issues and why does someone
with anxiety have intermittent gas
floating diarrhea constipation
irritability and cramping because they
don't actually have those conditions
pathologically they have them because
the same gene and the same deficiency
methyl folate that causes poor catacol
amine regulation also causes poor
intestinal motility so they chase
allergies all of their life they're like
well I went and got an allergy test done
I'm allergic to wheat soy corn Dairy
blueberries bananas I'm allergic to all
this stuff so I cut it all out of my
diet I'm like okay how's it going for
you I still get cramping I still get
bloating I still get gas I still get
constipation okay because it's not the
contents of the God it is the pace of
the gut remember our our intestinal
tract is a 30 foot long conveyor belt
you put contents on it at one end and as
it you know as it exits the stomach as
it traverses the small intestine and
eventually into the large intestin the
colon and it exits the rectum it goes
from being very alkaline I mean sorry
from being very acidic to being very
alkaline and the sequence of events is
important and just like any Factory
that's running on a conveyor belt system
if you walk in that factory and double
the speed of the conveyor belt or triple
the speed of the conveyor belt or even
worse reverse the speed of the conveyor
belt the entire assembly line would
break down but there's nothing wrong
with the conveyor belt or the part
that's on the conveyor belt or the
people that are working there it's not
the it's very often it's not the gut
bacteria or the contents of the gut it's
the pace of the gut so by missing these
simple nutrients you get the expression
of all of these conditions right if I
was able to magically go into your body
and just deplete methyl folate or
deplete the complex of B vitamins I
promise you your anxiety would come back
like the tide and when your anxiety came
back so would your sleep Interruption
and your gut issues you would have a
skyrocketing incidents of gas bloating
constipation irritability cramping and
you may or may not relate it to that
efficiency but it is when I was in the
when I was in the um you know the
mortality space I was reading medical
records for a living for 20 years and I
read thousands and thousands and
thousands of medical records and I was
po through these medical records and it
was always astounding to me that you
would see people with chronic conditions
doing the same thing over and over and
over and over again and the chronic
condition would never heal right so like
people that would have chronic anemia
generally the the treatment for that is
um you know um
B12 folic acid and iron well 44% of the
population can't process folic acid so
you're treating people that have anemia
with folic acid which they can't process
and so you keep feeding it to them and
the anemia never gets better some of
those people would stumble upon
methylfolate the form that your body
converts it into and instantly the
anemia would go away now when the anemia
goes away the energy returns when the
energy Returns the sleep deepens so You'
see this whole myriad of things get
fixed just by putting the right raw
material back into the human body I mean
if I depleted vitamin D3 from your
bloodstream um if I can magically go in
and just deplete the sunshine vitamin
which I think is arguably the most
important nutrient in the human body
it's the only vitamin you know human
beings make on our own you start to
deplete that the first thing to to fall
is the immune system right which is why
D3 deficiency was the second leading
cause of morbidity in Co it's also why
vitamin D3
deficiency um which is more prevalent in
minorities um made people say well covid
disproportionately affects minorities
that's true it had nothing to do with
them being a minority it had to do with
the pigment of their skin the darker the
pigment of the skin the lower the
vitamin D3 the lower the vitamin D3 the
more compromised the immune system the
more susceptible you are to all kinds of
viruses and pathogens not the least of
which is co so this wasn't this was an
issue with a nutrient deficiency D3 not
an is an issue with a massive Auto
immune um you know Ma massive amount of
imuno comprom compromised people this
was an issue with a massive amount of
nutrient
deficiencies and if you if you trace the
nutrient deficiency in a human being and
you find it and you put that raw
material back into their body they
thrive in ways they just never could
have imagined and how broad of a
spectrum is the missing um elements so
if I were to go and take a DNA test am I
going to fall into one of five
categories or one of 500 categories one
of about five categories because we're
human beings we're all very very similar
right so these five genes are in every
human right and they're the five
methylated genes um and there are other
genes that you could look into I mean
like I said you can really go down the
rabbit hole of genetic testing but what
you want what you want to find out is
what basic raw materials that my body
needs to perform the majority of its
functions am I deficient in right the
majority of us are deficient in vitamin
D3 or deficient in methylfolate not
folic acid folic acid we've been led to
believe is a vitamin it's not vitamin B9
folic acid is an entirely man-made
chemical we make folic acid in a
laboratory you cannot find folic acid
anywhere on the surface of the Earth it
does not occur naturally in nature and
you'll never convince me that something
that we synthetically make in a
laboratory is somehow necessary for
Optimal Health it's interesting that's
how I feel about supplementation in
general so anybody that's been following
me for a while knows I don't do
supplements I will try you have a good
diet yes but that's not why I don't do
supplements the reason I don't do
supplement is so often you hear oh my
God this thing is like super critical
you've got to have it oh sorry by the
way it kills you and the the number of
times I'm at an age now where the number
of times something started out as a
miracle cure only to find out it causes
cancer or whatever whatever and so now
I'm just super paranoid now having said
that in full disclosure because in the
research I heard you say that thing
about methylated uh multivitamin I
literally bought one right away I'm like
let me just try cuz I I don't have a
Phil philosophical problem with it I
just worry about isolating compounds
when you isolate a compound who knows
like nature expects you to get things in
a certain way right so like I'm always a
little I do it I want to be very honest
but I'm I'm it makes my radar every time
I separate a yoke from an egg white I'm
like nature doesn't expect me to
separate these two things and so is
there some problem that you can generate
anyway so I just I'm a little paranoid
about isolating compounds uh so I guess
in that since I'm very on board with
being super skeptical of folic acid um
but I'm alsman that's the other one yeah
I'm also skeptical though of like
metformin All the Rage the number of
people I've talked to even off camera
who are like bro I was willing to say on
camera this is important even off camera
I'm telling you right now like I'm into
this thing I just cannot bring myself to
do it yeah I'm not a huge fan of
Metformin metformin has all kinds of
secondary consequences I mean it's a
good gluc ofage but um but you can get
you know if you look at side by side
clinical studies that berberine which is
a root performs better than metformin at
not only just hemoglobin A1c lowering
hemoglobin A1c which is a three-month
average of your blood sugar but also
controlling insulin levels and there are
virtually no side effects to berberine
right um now there's a trade-off to
glucoses like metformin and some of
these other ones with zampi or eptide
you know gp1 really fast just because
it's a fancy word and I'm married to a
Greek woman so FJ means to eat basically
so glucose eater is yeah yeah
gluc um but you know if you're morbidly
obese and a type two diabetic um
metformin could save your life right
like insulin could save your life but
the thing is do you want to have a
dependency on those things long term and
I would agree with you the answer is no
um I'm you know I'm a huge fan of basic
supplementation if you're not getting
enough vitamin D3 you should not be it's
the one supplement I will take during
the winter okay yeah I hear you on that
so uh okay so methylated multivitamin
what happens if I overdo it what happens
if I don't need it and I take it that's
a good question um so number one that's
one of the reasons why you get a genetic
test because you can see if your body
can can methylate it or not so if you
you know that if you if you don't have
the gene that codes for the conversion
of folate into methyl folate for example
you can very safely supplement with
methylfolate but let's say that you over
supplement um the difference between
over supplementation with water soluble
vitamins um and over supplementing with
fat soluble vitamins is Night and Day so
a de and K are fat soluble vitamins you
want to take those with food if you are
supplementing with them you also want to
be cautious about how high the levels
get if you look at most blood tests
there's even a range for vitamin D3 I
think it goes AE D and k a d and K I
still remember from grad school put your
vitamins in the attic adk and I still
remember that analogy so sound really
smart but I just remember that from from
school but um uh so ad and K those are
fat solubles so those actually can
accumulate in tissues and what have you
but water soluble vitamins are meant at
sometimes to be in excess and sometimes
to be in deficit right because what if
we um when we were forging around at
high amounts of grass-fed animals for a
period of time and then ate high amounts
of berries and Foliage for a period of
time well you can't just say
well at one period of my diet I'm toxic
and the other one I'm deficient no what
happens is the body actually gets rid of
those very easily you let them go in the
urine which is why if you look at
natural ranges for things like B12 it
goes all the way up to 1240 depending on
on the lab you know nanograms per
deciliter you know vitamin D3 goes from
30 to 100 it's not more toxic at 90 than
it is at 70 60 to 80 is the target range
but um
so you can you can safely with water
soluble vitamins if you were taking a
methylated multivitamin for example you
could get away with maybe I got a little
bit too much B12 and a little bit too
much of the B complex um now massively
supplementing with them is totally
different but when you take
most um you know high quality methylated
multivitamins they're in a ratio that
your body can get rid of even if you met
the nutrient requirement for your body
across the entire Spectrum so it's very
little risk with things like that right
it's again it's like D3 you know what if
I got 30 minutes of sunlight one day and
I got two hours of sunlight the next day
without burning my skin am I at risk
because I created more iuse of vitamin
D3 in in the prolonged sun exposure than
I am when I had less sun exposure no
you're not at risk your body's meant to
survive and optimizing those ranges you
will know right away if you start taking
a methylated multiv Vin whether or not
your anxiety your anxiousness and your
gut issues are coming from a deficiency
because you will see those things near
immediately take a
backseat all right so as people think
about um I want to do something amazing
with my life I want to make sure that
I'm cognitively optimized we've talked
briefly about uh we know that you're
going to get sleep um some Diet things
but I want to now start going into the
protocols so if I want to really get
killer sleep what do I not do and what
do I do so if you want to get really
killer sleep it starts in the morning
right um the best thing you can do for
circadian rhythm is develop a relatively
disciplined morning routine and and you
know I have I have a morning routine but
I also think that what happens is that
people that develop a morning routine
and then quit it or they do it kind of
sometimes and don't do it sometimes
they're sort of doing themsel this
disservice they're breaking all these
little little promises to themselves
they go I'm going to go to go to bed at
10:00 tonight and they go to bed at 1:30
in the morning right they sort they just
consistently let themselves down if you
started with little nuggets you know
give
yourself little wins I'm going to go to
bed at 10 o'clock tonight go to bed at
10 o'clock um and so um with sleep I
would say there's four things number one
um depending on where you live in the
world Waking with the sun is a arguably
the best idea in the world because you
know morning light has a very special
type of light there's no UVA there's no
UVB rays in Morning Light so you can't
damage your skin it has healthy blue
light not the kind of blue light that
comes from your screen but very healthy
blue wavelengths of light that regulate
not only melatonin but they also
regulate cortisol receptors so it helps
restore that circadian pattern also
going to bed around the same time within
an hour of um um your scheduled bedtime
every single night going to bed at 10:30
one night and 1. am the next night and
then midnight and then 9:30 and then
2:00 in the morning that is horrible for
your circadian
rhythm and within 30 minutes of
waking do the same thing over and over
and over again so in other words I I
wake up within 30 minutes of waking I am
out on my balcony with my skin exposed
to sunlight and I am doing three rounds
of 30 breaths if I can I am touching the
surface of the Earth if I can't I sleep
on a pmf mat but I wake up within 30
minutes I've hydrated and I've gone
outside and I've done three rounds of 30
breaths and exposed my skin to sunlight
like clockwork my wife will tell you I
never ever ever Miss Even in Colorado
even in Colorado in December in December
in January in Colorado I mean aging is
the aggressive pursuit of comfort it's
so sad that people don't want to go
outside it's too cold they don't want to
go outside it's too hot we got to stop
telling Grandma just to lay down just to
relax to eat at the first Pang of hunger
aging is truly the aggressive pursuit of
comfort there's rarely a temperature
that we can't deal with but if you can't
deal with the temperature outside get
expose your skin to sunlight even if you
have to go sit by a window right but
expose your skin does that count so I
wake up very early okay and I often
wonder uh okay so nine times out of 10
I'm I'm G to be in the midst of working
I'm not really going to notice when the
sun is coming up right um
but oftentimes I'll be like oh wow yeah
I've been sitting here and the Sun is
now hitting me in my eyes and I'm
noticing it and I'm like wait do I need
to go outside or is it okay that I'm
getting the sunlight through the window
it's okay to get get the sunlight
through the window but what I'm saying
is within 30 minutes of waking have a
routine that you do every day so for
example um I use breath work to control
my circadian rhythm now I have to
imagine that it's not enough to do the
same thing I have to do the right thing
over and over and over right I would say
so for example for people that do breath
work develop a breath work routine I do
three rounds of 30 breaths with a breath
hold in between what you mean by that
what is a round of breathing um so I do
30 it's a whm Hof style of of of
breathing the reason the reason why I
like it is that no matter matter where I
am in the world you can do it you can do
it in a hotel room you know few weeks
ago we were in 11 cities in nine days
and some of them were on opposite sides
of the world I went from LA to Dubai and
then Bahrain then New York and and so I
was changing a lot of time zones but
within 30 minutes of waking every single
day I sat and oriented myself preferably
um in sunlight I couldn't always do it
but I did three rounds of 30 breaths so
I I would take 30 obnoxiously deep
breaths I mean literally like my head
had been underwater for a minute and a
half and I didn't think it was ever
going to break the surface again like
obnoxiously deep breath if you're in a
hotel people should think that there's
some silliness going on in the in the
room next to them so and on the 30th
breath I exhale and I hold my breath as
long as I can and during that breathhold
I force myself to get outside of my head
I try to find like a car on the causeway
a burden you know in a tree or try to
find a you know an airplane going by
overhead just something that I can key
into outside of outside of my body so
I'm not thinking about the fact that I
want to breathe because contrary to
popular belief nitric oxide is not the
major major major vasodilator in the
body carbon dioxide is so if you want to
dilate your blood vessels first thing in
the morning which is a very good thing
then hold your breath for a prolonged
period of time at the end of a series of
breath rounds you can start with as
little as five breaths and hold then do
five deep breaths and hold and then five
more deep breaths and hold and exhale
and start your day and work your way to
10 breaths 15 breaths 20 breaths and
then 30 breaths so your body knows this
is what we do every day you know what
it's morning because he's breathing
right so when I when I would go from
Miami to Dallas Dallas Vegas Vegas la la
Dubai so there's five time zones or four
time zones right there but every morning
within 30 minutes I was doing three
rounds and 30 breaths like I would set
my circadian clock by that because I
never ever ever Miss and it's free and
people don't give it the Credence that
it deserves because it's free like I
wish I could charge it for it and patent
it and sell it as a supplement and then
people might take it seriously but the
truth is that um we all have three or
eight minutes to go find a place to sit
down and just do a round of breath work
and if we do it at the same time every
day we our body starts to get into that
cycle and then at night I do box
breathing which is just a 4 second
inhale a 4 second hold a 4 second exhale
and a 4 second hold
and I'll do four to 15 rounds of that
you try to get through 10 rounds of box
breathing and see if your eyes are still
not very very very heavy because when
you think about tracing that
square um and you focus on your
breathing and you don't carry your phone
into bed and you haven't taken a
tranquilizer before you go to bed what
happens is you know you're you're
actually clearing all of these catac
colomines from the brain I mean huberman
talks on his podcast about um you know
nasal breath work techniques that
actually calm anxiety they're actually
downregulating these catac colomines
which are fighting most people's sleep
right and so I use breath work at night
to get into that calm State I don't take
my phone into bed you certainly don't
want to be interacting with your phone
there's a difference between interacting
with Instagram like one second you're
watching a fight and the next second
you're watching somebody argue with
their girlfriend next second you're
watching this guy speeding in a boat
down the river um or
reading
right reading on your phone in low light
has a fraction of the waking impact that
interacting with your phone has where
you're scrolling and you're clicking to
another story and you're curious who
posted and then you look at their
profile and you're scrolling through
their profile that activity is very
stimulating to your brain reading is
very calming for your brain um so I
would say you know develop a good breath
work technique um at night get
consistent about your morning routine if
you can expose your SK to sunlight touch
touch the Earth do a round of breath
work and take a cold shower instead of
taking a regular shower does a matter
what time you go to bed um I would
prefer that you go to this bed at the
same time every night than that you go
to bed at a specific hour right there is
some research that says for every hour
before you go to bed before midnight it
compounds the amount amount of time you
have to spend in bed after midnight um I
haven't really been able to correlate
that to any really sound clinical study
and I'm not an expert on sleep but um
what I can tell you is that routine and
consistency especially with digestion is
the most important thing for your
circadian clock like when people travel
eat at the same time um eat at the same
time and never eat during your sleeping
window so for example like my biggest
travel that I never hear anybody talk
about is when you're constantly
switching time
zones we are way more tied to digestion
and we are the Sleep awake cycle of the
sun right so um let's say that you who
H finish yeah I know taking notes um so
let's say you live in the east coast
right so you live in Miami and you go to
bed at um uh 10 p.m. and you get up at
6: a.m. yep okay so let's just say you
go to bed at 10 you get up at 6
now you go to London okay so you're six
hours
ahead if you're in London and you eat
during your normal sleeping window
you're screwed I don't care how much
grounding earthing breath work or
sunlight exposure you get you will never
adjust to that time zone so in other
words take your sleeping window from 10:
p.m. to 6:00 a.m. and slide it to your
new time zone which would now be what
6 uh 4 a.m. to to to what noon right so
you're still eating on Miami time so
you're still eating on Miami time and
not eating during your normal sleeping
window if you want to try this out just
set your alarm for 3:30 this morning
wake up and have like you know a three
EG of gelet and and you know slice of
Weis toast and a fist full of berries
and try to go back to bed no chance that
would never work now I will say so I
travel a fair amount maybe not as much
as you certainly not at this point where
you really pounding the media tour yeah
um but but I travel a lot and I am
married to a Brit so I've done the LA to
London thing many many many times I've
done LA to Tokyo I've done LA to Dubai
LA to Kuwait like all over the place and
my rule is always sun-based so I get out
and I get light in my eyes light on my
skin as much as I can even in London
where I mean for you this would be
nothing but uh I'll go out not with my
shirt off but you know hiking up my
sleeves as much as I can and I will look
up at the clouds for as long as I can
bear not into the Sun but like up at the
sky at the brightest part of the side
that I the sky that I can bear without
damaging my eyes right try to get as as
much light in as early as possible for
as long as possible but I don't worry at
all about my eating window so in fact I
I will eat on local time and so but I
also use sleeping tablets when I travel
which you're probably going to hate but
it work works like a charm like I really
feel I can switch fast so Unisom but
Unisom has two variants one makes me
feel like I'm going to crawl out of my
skin it is it is unbearable okay and
then the other one I feel I'm a little
groggy the next day I will admit at
least for the first couple of hours
right but I can transition to the point
where I will sleep normally without
sleeping pills very fast okay as long as
I stick to my routine which is sunbed so
I've never heard any say that the I've
heard people tie diet to the Circadian
rhyth or the timing window of food to
the Circadian rhythm but nobody ever say
that it's more important than sun no
question we are way more tied to
digesting because you think about what
happens when we digest food right the
amount of blood and therefore the amount
of oxygen in our system is fixed so it
can't be here and here at the same time
digestion is a very blood intensive
oxygen intensive process this is why if
you know if you eat High gly glycemic
foods which raise your blood sugar very
quickly the reason why you get tired is
because it takes more blood more oxygen
to digest those Foods right so if I
stood you in front of a thermograph you
know that was reading the heat in your
body and you saw that before you started
to eat your your head was glowing bright
red and and and orange lots of Heat lots
of oxygen in your brain and then you eat
a very high carbohydrate meal basket of
bread you know some some some rice or a
bowl of pasta right and had a glass of
orange juice
now all of a sudden you would watch as
your head cooled and the blood left the
head and it diverted to the intestinal
tract well everything that you perceive
about energy is nothing more than oxygen
in your blood so if you told me G had a
lot of energy today physiologically what
you're saying is I had a lot of oxygen
in my blood today so if oxygen equals
energy which it does then I I want to be
very cautious about diverting oxygen
from my brain to my gut one of of the
reasons why I always fast on airplanes
domestically not internationally but
domestically I always fast on airplanes
because I I don't want to divert that
valuable oxygen to my digestive tract
when I'm sitting especially on an airpl
because there is limited oxygen on an
airplane I don't get that well because
when you're nothing is worse than
sitting for prolonged periods of time
and eating nothing will kill your energy
more than not moving and eating while
you're sedentary right so I'm not saying
you should move while you're eating but
when if you're going to fly from Miami
to La um you know and it's going to take
you five hours and um you're already
tired because you caught a morning
flight and then you feed yourself on
that flight while you're sitting you'll
be exhausted when that plane lands and
there's nobody that cannot fast just on
airplanes on domestic flights right I
mean tomorrow I'm going LA to New York
for for the UFC fights I'm going to fast
on the plane now I might eat before I
get on the plane and I'll be moving
around the airport and what have you but
when I get on the airplane it's either
black coffee or water and that's it um
while I'm domestically flying but my
whole point is when you get to your new
destination back to your London trip for
the first 48 hours that was the part
that I didn't say for the first 48 hours
and if you're going to be there much
longer than 48 hours then you can make
that time adjustment but for the first
48 hours do not eat during your normal
sleeping window and watch how quickly
you adjust to that time zone
in addition to getting sunlight on your
skin that also really helps because
you're right we're circadian we're tied
to the Circadian cycle of the Sun but
more so to digest let me ask though so
if I am let's say that I'm going to
London for um two adjust so I'm going to
be there for two weeks okay um my plan
would be again sun-based and I'm going
to eat based on my normal schedule in
the new place so for me because I wake
up so early I never eat before the sun
comes up uh I typically eat several
hours after the sun gets up so like on a
day like yesterday where I woke up at
2:45 a.m. which I by the way I don't set
an alarm this is not me championing you
should get as much sleep as humanly
possible you should get a lot of sleep
get as much sleep as you can I don't set
an alarm but there are times in my life
uh 900 p.m. like it's a religion so 9
that's not bad yeah it's not hor see and
I like what you just said 900 p.m. like
it's like it's religion correct that is
so good for you and the fact that you
just said it with such conviction you go
to bed at 9:00 p.m. that's a little
psychological win for you every night if
you went to bed at 11:30 you'd be really
disappointed in yourself correct yeah
we're we probably should talk about
identity later let's stick with the more
sort of dietary tactical ones for the
moment um so I would
Sun uh I'm going to go to bed on well so
I have rules don't go to bed before 9:00
p.m. if you're in a new time zone if you
can stretch it to 10 even better so if
you arrive at 11:00 a.m. sorry tough
break you're it's a huge time zone
change you're going to be exhausted but
you need to stay up get up move around
go do something that's engaging uh don't
go to bed before 9: go to bed at 9: I
take sleeping tablets the first few
nights in an Ever decreasing amount um
and then I'm going to eat on my normal
thing so like I said if I wake up at
2:45 I'm not going to eat before 8 or 9
a.m. MH uh because again it ties to the
sunlight so I'm trying to get sun
exposure before I eat I want my body to
fully understand this is awake time this
is not
bedtime um
so also I'm trying to stretch the number
of hours I keep my uh I do intermittent
fasting 365 days a year awesome so um
just my average ends up being over the
course of a year 17 hours so on the
weekends shorter on the weekdays it can
go up as high as 20 so you start to eat
at you said 9 uh that's usually when I
eat30 and 9 you're done eating what two
my first meal three four yeah so I eat
my last meal at two okay um which
normally people would look at me like I
have Roaches on my face even after I
tell them the number of hours so the
math is what the math is right um but
yeah so I eat my last meal at two which
is very socially awkward right but
probably the reason why you sleep so
good too though I don't sleep great so I
average 6 hours and 3 minutes according
to my aura ring okay um I would love to
average seven hours would be I think
better I'm going to do a I'm going to do
a jean I'm going to do a cheek swab on
you I'm going to look at your genetic
profile and I'm going to give you a
specific safe water soluble supplement
for catacol amine regulation because I
would bet my entire career that you have
a gene mutation called CT God I hope so
the anxiety thing is the only one I care
about I can deal with the way that I
sleep in fact well they're both going to
go at the same time yeah they're both
going to go the same time because
they're both related to excess catacol
amines if you look at if you look at
serum concentration studies of catacol
amines in the urine they are highly
linked to anxiety um and I'd be happy
you know for the people that are the
really you know the science and nerds
that are watching this podcast I'm can I
send you the links and you put them in
the notes of the podcast okay so that's
what I want to do because in case people
want to really go and and look at the
research because methylation research is
relatively new we you know we only
mapped the human genome completely in
what 2009 right so lot of methylation
genetic science and the science behind
supplementing for deficiency is is is
brand new we'd rather actually Chase
mental illness than a lack of mental
Fitness and I think people are less
mentally fit than they are mentally ill
yeah look as the science comes out uh
that I'm very very eager to recognize
that I am creating my own problems that
I can cuz I really don't find it
interesting to be like oh my mom had
anxiety and I have anxiety and oh I
guess it just is what it is it's like I
want to figure out what's the thing what
am I doing in my modern lifestyle that's
causing me a problem what can I do to
change it I have an obscene amount of
discipline so whatever works I will do I
am obsessed with efficiency right
Effectiveness uh and so yeah if if I
really do have Calm tea and that's my
problem and I can supplement that would
be amazing I love me a good blood draw
so I would happily partaken of cheek
swap blood draw whatever whatever uh so
that weig office in Beverly Hills I'll
send the dock here and we'll get a
little that would be amazing the key is
though because I have this frequently
with guests uh they will come on we will
do all this and then they'll I never get
a chance to connect with them about what
we find like that's the next thing
because we'll come back on and do it you
want to do it on a we'll do a followup
I'm sure the audience would love to see
that um because and then most
importantly then the followup whatever 6
months later to see if this this
actually worked because when I don't
feel anxious I feel super human the
number of times I've said that to my
wife if I could snap and just never not
a certain level of anxiety is useful I
like that I take things seriously that's
something that I appreciate in my makeup
but man if I had a dial and I could just
turn that down a bit yeah uh that would
be amazing well that's what we're going
to do we're going to turn you into a
superum do you do you think that you
work well under pressure say that a lot
um no what I do believe is that I am an
Unstoppable machine that can't be killed
and so no matter how much pressure the
situation has I will not allow it to
break me so I have been through obscene
things things where you're so distressed
you can't sit on furniture have you ever
had that wow it's not a fun feeling but
I was like me I'll get back up I will
put myself back together it was very
weird wow but anyway was this just from
anxiety uh no this is from when you're
when hundreds of millions of dollars are
on the line and [__] is real real real
yeah uh yeah all of a sudden like things
can get pretty heavy pretty fast so I I
have a vice that Vice is stress I have
for sure shortened my life by my
willingness to run into hyper stressful
situations right um because I love the
game of life I think you can win the
game of life it isn't money for anybody
wondering but it is meaning and purpose
yes so I would agree with that by the
way yeah um so it's interesting because
the the compt gene mutation has two um
if if you actually do any research on
this G mutation you'll find that there's
two categories they're called Warriors
Warriors Like a Warrior yes or Warriors
worry constantly so you have the wor
Warrior side which is I would say I'm a
worrier by nature and I'm a Warrior by
identity creation because yeah the the
Warriors are the ones that um The
Warriors are the ones that have what we
call consant overachiever profile which
means that you hold yourself to an
obscenely high standard that is correct
um and you can find yourself um very
easily disappointed in other people
because you feel like they just can't do
the basics ironically I'm the exact
opposite because I know how hard it was
because I knowe even to people that just
by Nature I am weak and soft and my
journey to success was one of learning
to get hard so you hold yourself to a
high standard but then you don't hold
the people around you to the same which
is problematic which is very problematic
in terms that doesn't that's a kind of a
strange dichotomy because usually people
that hold themselves to a very high
standard right socioeconomically
physically mentally routine like you
said I have a lot of discipline um I I
like you said you go to bed at 9 9:30
like religion I mean it just shows that
level of conviction usually that expect
expectation trickles over to the people
in their sphere where you're like hey
brother you can't even just do the
basics like this is this comes easy for
me here's the bad news so I have all the
empathy in the world but the question I
will ask anybody that's struggling with
it because I love you and I want to see
you do well and now what so sure it's
harder for you than the next person I
get it but now what so it breaks my
[__] heart to see people struggle as
an entrepreneur my biggest problem is I
do not fire underperformers nearly fast
enough because I want to see them do
well my whole sense of identity is it
doesn't matter who you are today it
matters who you want to become and the
price you're willing to pay to get there
and so I really invest in creating a
space where people can pay that price
and rise
up so that that is a a they really have
to fire themselves to get yeah I mean I
try not to be that ridiculous but I I do
really struggle with that because I can
I can
see there uh but for the grace of God go
I there but there but for the grace of
God go yes correct uh that phrase makes
a lot of sense to me that that could
have just as easily been me if I hadn't
encountered a certain set of ideas right
that would have been me and so I have
empathy but empathy won't help you your
life is still going to suck so even if I
give you a ton of sympathy even right
and I'm just like oh my God poor you
like I want to help or empathy I totally
get it neither of those are going to get
you where you want to go you have to
become a hardcore [__] there
just is no there there is no excuse it
it's actually very interesting seeing
you in person because you're actually
fit yeah because a lot of times people
have great ideas but they can't control
their body oh I'm like oo this that to
me tells me everything I need to know
about where you're at currently not your
future potential you still have all the
potential in the world right but if you
can't transform your potential into
usable skill set through discipline and
Relentless focus and action your life
will never be what you want it to be so
true yeah and and and I think it put put
you out of alignment too it's like
what's the saying never trust a skinny
Chef yeah right yeah you know if you're
a really good Chef wouldn't you be
eating all the time I get the I get the
statement but of course I would say
never disciplined chef and if they can't
control what they put in their mouth and
God only knows right so yes but this
this to me is the reason that I do what
I do despite I just I never need to work
again but I am so convinced that there
is this thin veneer between where people
are and success and that thin veneer is
just a set of ideas you have a bad set
of ideas that lead you to be
undisciplined discipline really is the
secret thing that unlocks everything the
question becomes and I agree with that I
want to ask you what do you tell people
as somebody who clearly has a lot of
discipline what do you say to somebody
who just can't get themselves to do it I
say set very very very small short-term
achievable goals for yourself just like
you said tell yourself you're G to go to
bed at 10 o'clock and go to bed at 10
o'clock you have to learn to trust
yourself before you actually can gain
the discipline I think to even be an
entrepreneur develop good work habits
you have to you have to actually gain
your own trust and so the only person
that knows that you keep letting
yourself down is yourself right so you
go you know what I'm going to start
working out tomorrow morning tomorrow
morning I'm going to I bought this
weight set I put it in the other room
tomorrow morning I'm going to get up I'm
going to do 25 air squats and 25
push-ups and I'm going to do that breath
work that I heard on Tom's um podcast
and then you don't right and I think
that degrades your your belief and your
confidence in yourself and once that's
gone your ability to get outside of that
and develop any kind of work ethic in my
opinion is is eroded right it just has
to start with the little incremental
winds for yourself you can lie to
everybody else but just don't lie to
yourself right I mean you you you wake
up in the morning you say okay well you
know I like what Gary said on that
podcast and it's not going to cost me a
dime to wake up every morning within 30
minutes I'm going to find a place to sit
down expose my skin to um sunlight and
I'm going to do three rounds of 30
breaths and give yourself that win and
start doing that every single day and as
you actually get in the habit of being
disciplined to the promises that you
make to yourself it makes other promises
you make even to other people become
that much more likely to be fulfilled in
my opinion most people still won't do it
and the reason I think they won't do it
is there's two things one identity but
identity is ultimately going to be the
out come of wanting it badly enough and
well wanting it badly enough but then
also like you said you have to put it
into action which you won't do though if
you don't want it badly enough what do
you so for me the the foundation is
desire that's it if you don't have
desire nothing else will happen what
what's the foundation for you well I
would I would say that's desires of
probably the same the same motivator I
mean it's if you if you have desire then
you can actually develop the discipline
and I I'm I'm with you too I think that
discipline is more important than um
than motivation right because motivation
kind of comes and goes people wait to
get motivated to work out rather than
the discipline to work out it's kind of
the David goggin's method I think about
it when every time I walk up to a cal
plune I always have five other things
that I'd rather do and I walk up to the
Cal plune and I take my shorts off and
take my shirt off and I do four deep
breaths and I get in the water while I'm
negotiating with myself that I should
just go down and get a cup of coffee or
maybe I'll just do my breath work first
or you know what I maybe uh you know
maybe I'll just go check on Sage real
quick and you know I instead of
negotiating with myself I just get in
the C so that's what I do wake up that's
the thing I did mention I you know I
wake up brush my teeth splash water on
my face and before I even walk to the
kitchen and start breath work or sit out
in the sun like I get a CO lunch really
before the breath work yeah so it's my
cold plunge is right I mean I have my
bed bathroom cold plune and so I
literally wake up go to the bathroom I
walk over to my sink splash water on my
face I brush my teeth I walk in the
other room and I get in the cold punch
and the entire time I'm thinking about
reasons why I don't want to get in the
cold punch don't I know it in the the
entire time that I'm walking over there
and then usually I'm about 15 seconds in
in the water and I'm like [__] I'm in
the cold punch um you know because I
just do it as a matter of of of
discipline but I've never regretted it
once you know when I've gotten out but I
think that you know back to your you
know theory on really supporting people
and trying to you know figure out how
much rope can I give them to become the
person that they truly have the
potential to become I think that
developing that discipline and also back
to what you were saying about diet you
know your your diet or your
supplementation or your lack thereof has
a massive impact on your capacity to
function optimally and that includes
your your your mental state because we
know um and you're probably well aware
of this that you know there a very
interesting study by MIT in
2016 um they published a study that that
irrevocably proved that the amydala in
the brain where we feel
emotion is the soul gateway to the
hippocampus to where our memory is
stored right so there's there's
essentially one Corridor that we can
travel down to enter our memory and it
is through the hippocampus it's through
the emotional state of the body so in
other words your current emotional state
does determine what Memories you
retrieve the memories that you retrieve
also project into your conscience and
help determine your future so your
current emotional state if it determines
what Memories you retrieve and your
memories you retrieve determine what
projects into your conscience then it
really means that your current emotional
state determines your future so if we
can help people get control of their
emotional state which begins with having
the right raw materials and the right
physiology in your body so you actually
can experience the full spectrum of
emotion then I think you give people a
better shot at walking into the future
that they want to design for themselves
but if you don't learn to control your
emotional state you'll never control
your future
I agree so aggressively I'm getting
cramps really uh so you agree so
aggressively you're getting yes I don't
think I've ever heard it put that
way so you're so calm when you say these
big dramatic things like I agree so
aggressively I'm
getting yeah so you're a character dude
thank you sir um I think that going back
to the idea you're having a biological
experience I I want to scream that at
people so that they understand okay
you're having a problem you're going to
blame yourself you're going to say
you're a loser stop remember that this
is a biology problem solve for the
biology you're missing
something if you are look some of this
is psychological there is no doubt but
the psychology is built on top of the
biology and if you I mean look it it it
is a feedback loop there is no doubt but
if you're going to give me one lever to
pull I'm going to pull the biology lever
first and foremost most aggressively
because if you have all the desire in
the world but you cannot create the ATP
you're not going to be able to do the
things you want to do like when people
ask me how I have so much energy how I
can work so hard all that I'm like well
first of all at a cellular level I can
generate the energy to do the things
that I want to do so true and I'm so
focused on my energy levels my biology I
eat based on my goals I sleep based on
my goals like I do all the things that I
need to do to optimize my biology
because I'm trying to do these things
and goals make demands right so if
you're trying to be the best parent if
you're trying to be an entrepreneur if
you're whatever it doesn't matter what
you're trying to do you are going to
have to be able to be hyper persistent
you're going to have to be completely
determined there's a great quote forget
he's super famous coach but he said
fatigue makes cowards of us
all and I always thought woo that's
something to think that I have a
complete completely different
personality when I'm fatigued oh no
doubt one of those and you're also in a
low oxidative State yeah I think that I
I have never thought about it in terms
of oxygen because I don't know the
process well enough but that makes a lot
of sense to me that um whatever thing
we're describing if we're using a sort
of blunt tool like the word
fatigue or we're really down into the
weeds and it the answer is oxygen and
the rate at which it's traveling through
your system it's the same idea your phys
physiology is stopping you at some level
from doing the thing you want to do and
that and this was an idea introduced to
me by Jordan Peterson where he said uh
we have Micro
personalities and he's like when you're
in a certain mood and he always used the
example of an alcoholic you have an
alcoholic they're a different version of
themselves entirely different um set of
morality uh the way they act whether
they're aggressive whether they're
willing to lie like all these things
like they slot into very knowable set of
personality traits when they're um after
their next drink and when I thought oo
that's really interesting so I have a
different micro personality when I'm
feeling really anxious that I don't
respect in myself that that doesn't mean
I don't respect other people dealing
with it I'm just saying one of the
things that I do to pull myself out of
that is I just do not allow myself to
stay there of course I need to address
the biology as well but it's like that's
the feedback loop you have to get get
the the biology right but you also have
to get the mindset right because they
are going to feed back to each other in
this but the mindset is born from the
biology you know we talked earlier about
what is in a mood what is an emotional
states this collection of
neurotransmitters manufacturing those
neurotransmitters creating the
supply um and then once you create the
supply learning to regulate it is a part
of what creates all these little anchors
that are off of our Stern right we
talked about anxiety but you know so
many of these especially in the
entrepreneurial Community they you know
they quote unquote suffer from add or
ADHD but we don't really realize that
attention deficit disorder and attention
deficit H hyperactivity disorder these
are not really attention deficits at all
they're actually attention overload
disorders right there too many windows
open at the same time you know people
that have ADD or ADHD don't lack the
ability to pay attention they lack the
ability to pay attention to so many
things right so um so for example you
know in the human mind we it's we know
well that we don't just create thought
right we also dismantle thought we
actually downregulate thought or else
you'd always be in the same mood You'
always think the same thing how do we
transfer from mood to mood you
experience a mood you have a stimulus
that creates a certain Cascade of
neurotransmitters then those
neurotransmitters are degraded and you
no longer feel that mood you no longer
feel that emotional state so if that
process is too fast or too slow then you
can hold on on to things for a prolonged
period of time you know like my wife and
I have different methylation and we do
you know we we hold on to things very
differently if we have friction in the
morning by the time I walk out of the
bedroom I've totally forgotten we even
had an argument like I'll walk back in
the bedroom and be like babe you want
some coffee and she's like Are you
seriously talking to me right now I'm
like yeah she's like we just had a
massive fight I'm like that was like 10
minutes ago right are we still fighting
cuz um she's like well you didn't
apologize me I'm like well I'm sorry um
you know but I mean it's I they just
leave my body like instantly um but you
know she can hold on to those so what is
the difference between these things it's
the rate at which we break these these
things down people with attention
deficit disorder which is so prevalent
have you know they have a slow breakdown
of these neurotransmitters that that
allows thought to continue to pile on
top of thought on top of thought on top
of thought and that's why the mind gets
the mind gets clouded it's not that they
can't pay attention it's that they can't
pay attention to so many things right
and usually this is also nutrient
deficiencies which is why diet can
actually make ADHD or an add much worse
or it can actually make it much better
methyl folate for example the primary
nutrient that actually helps
downregulate neurotransmitters when
that's deficient people will go from
thought to thought to thought trust me
cold plunging is amazing it is all is
hyped up to be lease and I both do this
all the time and if you have one of the
beautiful tubs from plunge you really
can train your mind while you train your
body to adapt to uncomfortable
situations with every plunge get in the
cold water Center yourself get focused
it is amazing the way that it will
toughen your mind and the great news is
the Sleek ones from plunge have amazing
Tech that makes it super fast and easy
to set up you can use them indoors or
outdoors with no Plumbing required build
your resilience get tough and be able to
tackle difficult problems just go to
plunge. comom and use the code impact to
get
$150 off your incredible cold plunge tub
today again that's code impact for
$150 off your purchase at
plunge. or you can find the link in the
show
notes and so they'll they'll be thinking
about a job they're working on and and
their friend walks up and they thinking
about a job they start talking to their
friend and then they notice a logo on
their friend's jacket that reminds them
of a vacation that they want to take and
now they're thinking about a job talking
to their friend looking at a logo
thinking about a vacation they want to
take all at the same time because they
haven't degraded those those previous
thoughts I mean I think that when you're
talking about the foundation being like
sunlight sleep um you know uh blood
sugar control I couldn't I couldn't
agree more but the other that I would
add to that is seriously is diet and or
targeted
supplementation I'm G add something
weird to the conversation
here the thing that I will add is I
think that there is there's not enough
consequence in people's lives like when
you are in a modern context there's so
many safety nets things are you can be
in an air conditioned room you don't
have to worry about where your next meal
is coming from certainly for the vast
majority of people in the west MH and
and anecdotally from just my own
experience of somebody who was diagnosed
with hyperactivity disorder when I was a
kid they would almost certainly call it
ADHD now um the way that it feels is um
I'm doing this thing I hit a moment of
discomfort and my brain goes oh cool
here's another thing to think about that
isn't as uncomfortable as that thing and
then when that one gets comfortable
here's another thing to think about that
and so I'm constantly having to force
myself to come back to the task when
however the stakes are high and this is
why I think a lot of people say I work
best under pressure is you need the
sense of like holy [__] the world is
going to end or something very bad is
going to happen if I don't do this and
so you're just waiting for that moment
where it clicks over and now the stakes
suddenly feel high enough and you have
to address it and so I call this some
people need to be chased by a lion and
when you're being chased by a lion
that's real clarifying that is the only
thing you're going to be thinking about
and dealing with at that moment I I
agree with that too but I mean this that
if if your whole life depends on you
beinga chased by a lion I mean the
amount of stress that you put your
yourself under is you know in in a lot
of cases is highly unnecessary what if
you actually instead of giving equal
priority to all of the tasks that come
into your mind which is what happens
when you open thought at a faster rate
than you degrade it you start to
actually give equal priority to every
thought that's coming into your mind so
like you're you're closing on the dream
home of a Lifetime right and you got 40
minutes to get the paperwork back to the
broker or you could potentially lose
this house for good and um you're
working on the paperwork and you get a
ding on your phone and you're like oh
it's an Instagram message and it's your
neighbor's cousin's kid uh fishing in a
lake and you're like well I wonder if he
catches the fish and so you start wa
this is going to have zero impact on
your life and you're just curious you
start looking at that and then all of a
sudden you feel that well I don't have
40 minutes left I got 30 minutes and I
don't have 30 minutes I got 25 minutes
and now that external pressure forces
you to drop the phone hyperfocus on on
what you're doing and at 459 you get the
paperwork back to the broker and you're
like I work well under pressure right
you're essentially from a physiological
standpoint you're saying I lack the
ability to set priorities internally so
I use external priorities to set them my
I use external pressure to set my
priorities and this is how most people
go through life because they haven't
they don't have that proper balance of
neurotransmitters either in the supply
or the demand and so now equal weight
gets given to every single thought and
they're labeled add or ADHD or their
mind is very clouded right and the more
disorganized we are in the mind The More
We crave organization in our outside
environment which is essentially what
OCD is Right obsessive compulsive
disorder is obsessively trying to
control the environment around you
because you're so disorganized in the
mind so people whose minds are not
cluttered are not bothered by cluttering
their outside environment people that
have very active minds are bothered very
much by clutter in their outside
envirment environment you know if
they're going to study not only does the
desk they're studying on have to be
clean but the room the desk is in has to
be clean they notice that sock against
the you know the baseboard and they got
to go pick it up and put it in the
hamper before they can actually sit back
down and work on a project and this is
this is an effort to clean up the
outside environment to to save them from
the chaos that's going on
internally because I don't have OCD that
is not one that I can uh comment on in
terms of what it feels like in
internally um so that makes it makes a
lot of sense I don't know the science
well enough to know whether I agree or
disagree it certainly has internal logic
and makes a lot of sense um if all of
your if you're having trouble
distinguishing between the
prioritization of a given thought um I
think my gut instinct is people will
find even if they solve for that problem
kind of like anxiety solving the diet
problem stopped it from being
generalized but didn't stop it when
there really was something that was high
stakes but but I felt like my anxiety is
now spilled over into an unusable format
right and so even if I were to 100%
solve the um the the physiological
component of this there still is going
to be a certain amount of just mental I
don't think we ever want to just not be
able to feel anxiety right I think what
we want to be able to do is feel anxiety
in situations where we should feel
anxiety I mean if you're claustrophobic
and you step on a crowded elevator or if
you're you're afraid of heights and you
walk the edge of a 30th floor balcony
those are completely different scenarios
than us having a conversation like we
are right now and me starting to become
consumed with anxiety to the point where
you're now speaking to a facade because
internally I'm trying to manage my my
feeling of anxiousness and anxiety and
this is where a lot of people lie right
they don't fake anxiety they fake being
okay like most people don't fake
depression they fake being okay talk to
me about
depression well you know what's
interesting about depression is when you
know when I was in the when I was in the
um you know in the in the Life Insurance
business when I was in the mortality
space the
prevailing uh We've now disproven the
serotonin hypothesis but the prevailing
hypothesis at the time was that
Depression was due to low levels of
Serotonin this is the whole concept
behind ssris you know these selective
serotonin reuptake Inhibitors and we
said if you were low on serotonin you
were by definition
depressed and I I remember I used to
think all the time well if the
definition of depression is low
serotonin then why are we not trying to
raise
serotonin um because that's not what
weari does attempt to raise the
availability right so it's saying keep
it in the system so it's available don't
re it doesn't actually really raise
serotonin what it does is it it it
rations what little serotonin you have
and the way that it rations is it it
inhibits The receptors that uptakes so
you're saying what they should have done
is how do you get it to produce more
yeah so you like instead of having a
full cup of you know water you've got a
quarter cup of water so now you but it
has to last you all day so you just sip
on it all day instead of whacking it
back all you know in the morning having
a massive emotional response in the
morning and then the coffee being able
to you know the Cup being able to fill
itself the rest of the way back up so
the the methylation of these
neurotransmitters like we talked about
begins in the gut right I mean 90% of
the neurotransmitter production in our
bodies happens in the gut before it
travels up the Vegas nerve and it goes
into the brain and secreted by um you
know secreted it's not made in the brain
but it's secreted by the brain and so
the supply of these neurotransmitters is
heavily tied to this gut brain access
and so you know certainly depression can
begin in the outside environment there
are plenty of traumatic events that can
cause people to to be depressed but
people that um suffer from prolonged
depression I mean I've I've had people
come in to see me that I you know and I
ask them how long have you been on
anti-depressants and they say 15 or 18
years I mean my first question is always
when did you think it was going to kick
in great question I mean when did you
think it was going to kick in and by
that time it usually helps them just
enough that they remain hopeful yeah
that they remain hopeful which is super
sad to me because you know I I I always
use this analogy that when I was in grad
school um I was getting my second human
biology degree and I had to take all
these plant bodney courses which I
absolutely hate it but you have to take
them to get to get degree morphology of
phof fights and like all this nonsense
but what really struck me about these
courses is that anytime there was
something wrong in a bush tree shrub
right if you were to actually call a
true arborist or true botanist out to
your house then you got a palm tree and
the leaves are rotting in the palm tree
they actually won't touch the leaves the
branches the the the trunk of the tree
the first thing they'll do is they'll
cortz the soil right and and they'll go
you know what there's no nitrogen in the
soil
and then they'll add nitrogen to the
soil and the leaf will heal but we don't
think about human beings like this
anymore we've lost so much faith in
mankind and so much face in humanity and
the ability of this to heal this and so
when when we look at nutrient
deficiencies in the soil causing disease
all the way up in the leaf you have to
look at nutrient and physiological
deficiencies in the body causing um
issues in the in the brain you know
things that we call mental disease
mental you know mental disorders if you
actually boil down the majority of
mental disease or mental um uh
conditions they at their root cause they
are a lack of raw material right they're
a they're they're missing nutrients in
the human body causing the physiology to
misbehave just like I said just taking
like taking butter away from a bakery
Chef right it's a single ingredient but
you're it's a necessary part of so many
recipes if I said you can bake whatever
you want you just can't use butter even
though it doesn't sound like a big deal
because it's one ingredient it would
affect so many recipes when you go into
the gut and you deprive the gut of its
process of methylation which is the
creation of a lot of these
neurotransmitters you lack Supply when
you lack Supply you lack the capacity to
create certain mood and then we call
this a disease or a mental disorder or a
mental condition where you have ADD or
ADHD or OCD or manic depression or
bipolar or your SK enic or your any
number of things you have generalized
anxiety or generalized depression I
don't think the human beings break down
that that bad and certainly not in the
numbers that we have going on in the
United States I think that we have a
lack of mental Fitness secondary to a
lack of nutrients in the human body and
the majority of our diets lack basic
nutrients the majority of our routines
back lack the capacity to give us the
basic physiology so that we don't have a
mental condition
okay so to say that um super succinctly
if you have depression there is a
nutrient deficiency going on that has to
do with methylation we can do a genetic
test and figure out what you're most
likely having a hard time creating yes
is there one like so we talked earlier
there's basically fiveish buckets that
people break down into is is depression
a known of those five buckets is it a
combination of different buckets you
know depression depending It's a
combination of different buckets but you
know what's what's astounding is you see
people that can't um for example um have
a deficiency in Sam S adenos methionine
Sam so what happens in the human body is
we take a normal amino acid called
homocystine we break this amino acid
down into another harmless amino acid
called methionine methionine goes up
into the brain it quiets the mind it
helps to actually break down
neurotransmitters um and it eventually
becomes something called s a denos
methionine Sami people that have
deficiencies in Sami that has been
linked to depression I'm not saying that
every person that's depressed needs to
take something called CME um nor am I
saying that every person that's
depressed has a methylfolate deficiency
but if you look at Research into folate
deficiency B complex deficiency and Sam
deficiency you will find enormous
correlations between the rate of
depression and the and the rate of
deficiency in those specific nutrients
Sam E B complex and methylfolate and
these are highly pre prevalent in
ancestral diets they are highly absent
in the modern diet how did we
historically get those things in um
historically we got them from from
fruits cruciferous vegetables and
grass-fed Meats meat fish chicken eggs
yes even Dairy and cruciferous um
vegetables and and and fruits but now
you know a lot of these and and what
impairs the ability for us to draw these
nutrients out of a lot of fruits for
example are um pesticides herbicides
insecticides and preservatives you know
when we first came up with preservatives
they were actually called anti-d
digestives but you know then some smart
marketer said well [__] people aren't
going to go to the anti-d digestive part
of the supermarket so we need to change
that name we'll call it preservatives
it's just like we spray all of our
grains with folic acid in the United
States we spray all white flour all
white pasta all white bread and all
white rice in the United States is
sprayed with the chemical folic acid you
don't have a choice over that unless you
buy organic it is all fortified or
enriched see they don't call it sprayed
with folic acid they call it fortified
or enriched they don't call it anti-d
digestive they call it preserved so it's
it's really hard for us to to navigate
this maze I mean the food pyramid is the
worst thing to ever happen to humanity I
to flip that thing exactly up down
because it has people in taking so much
glucose because it has people taking in
in so much glucose and and so much High
gly carbohydrate I mean people that eat
the most sugar have the highest blood
fat people that eat the most sugar are
are the fattest because you know sugar
raises our level of insulin and the
primary role of insulin yes well portion
of its role is to actually metabolize
glucose and move glucose into the cell
it a very large role of the um of the
hormone insulin is to block any other
form of energy use body and so when
sugars are high insulin is high when
insulin is high we can't access the
fatty acid pathway so what happens fat
begins to build up where's the first
place fat builds up in the blood in the
form of something called a triglyceride
well as triglycerides begin to rise it
makes the size of the cholesterol
molecule smaller as cholesterols gets
smaller in particulate size it gets more
dangerous two people with the exact same
LDL cholesterol level one could have one
could be a marker for longevity and the
other one could be a marker for
cardiovascular disease depending on the
particulate size of that molecule
meaning is because remember from high
school geometry as the size of a sphere
gets smaller its surface area to volume
ratio goes up so if you had two
basketballs of cholesterol and you
transport fat triglyceride around the
blood on the surface these two
basketballs and now I add more fat right
but I only have two basketballs I have
to make these four uh softballs and then
I add more fat I have to make them eight
baseballs and I add more fat I have to
make them 16 golf balls and then I have
to make them 32 little BB's I've never
changed the amount of cholesterol I've
changed the size of the cholesterol to
increase the surface area to carry more
fat and this is why when we eat high
amounts of sugar and we have high
insulin in the blood and triglyceride
builds up in the blood it starts to make
our cholesterol more more dangerous this
is why the triglyceride to cholesterol
ratio is actually more important than
the cholesterol level and okay there's a
few ideas here I want to tease out one
have you seen Lane Norton's um video
about cholesterol no what does he say h
well it'd be better if you'd seen it
I'll do my best but I may not be able to
give you enough specifics so what he was
saying is that um the smaller particles
penetrate the arterial wall wall more
frequently and get eaten by a mcage yeah
according to him they have less uh
smaller amount of um cholesterol in them
yes I think that's correct and then the
larger ones don't penetrate as often but
when they do they have a larger deposit
of cholesterol and so uh that the study
show according to him again I'm just
trying to do my best to accurately
represent what he said uh that it ends
up the literature says that it ends up
being a wash that it isn't the size of
the the cholesterol that matters that's
as close as I can get you to what he
said did you talk about whether or not
it was glycated or whether or not uh
we'd have to play the clip let's see
what Gary has to say about LDL
cholesterol I'm sure it is going to be
right in line with all the scientific
literature and he's not going to
embellish exaggerate or misrepresent
claims at all here's the myth about
cholesterol guys I mean I'll tell you
this right now cholesterol is the most
maligned and misunderstood compound in
the entire human body actually it's one
of the most studied compounds in the
human body with tens of thousands of
published research data I don't know how
you can malign a compound also can you
just imagine poor little cholesterol
cholesterol has a horrendous reputation
among the Aver for it it has a horrible
reputation for but this is the same guy
that I I did something on cyano
cabalan and and he was like he started
screaming into the camera uh the dosage
determines the poison the dosage
determines the poison why would you
worry about taking small doses of cyanic
cabalin when the dosage determines the
poison I said well if you believe that
the dosage really determines the poison
then I guess you believe in micro doing
with Mercury I guess you believe that
the fluoride levels that are in drinking
water are safe because they're they're
they're not enough to kill you or poison
you at these certain levels what we have
to stop doing is we have to stop
thinking about poisoning ourselves or
taking micro doses of chemicals and we
have to start not talking about single
dose toxicity but talking about
cumulative dose toxicity nobody ever got
mercury poisoning from a single piece of
tuna fish um they got mercury poisoning
because they consistently ate Mercury
Laden tuna fish and eventually the
toxicity level built up and and caused
harm you know I was talking in
particular here about cyanocobalamin
hydrogen cyanide based
B12 we can you go to Google yeah while
you're on here don't lose our place in
that video though cuz he goes on to talk
specifically about the yeah I would love
to understand this better yeah yeah
we'll talk about particulate size and
cholesterol and then so I was talking
about this nutrient I was like if this
is in your vitamins throw it out and
just find a vitamin that has methyl
cobalamin a natural form of B12 um so
scroll down the section we're by the way
we're on the National Library medicine
at the National Institute of Health here
scroll down to section 5.3 so there's
the component compounds right it's made
of the cobalt metal um and just click on
hydrogen
cyanide it's made from hydrogen cyanide
so this this form of B12 is made from a
flammable acute toxic health hazard
environmental hazard and if you scroll a
little bit further down there um and go
to view more at the bottom it's
interesting so the argument here rests
on whether this stuff whether the
constant exposure to the chemical
becomes a problem or not yes and the mic
exposure it's just like fluoride you
know we have certain amounts of fluoride
in our water I I first started
researching you you sounded crazy to me
when you were talking about fluoride and
I was like uhoh tin foil yeah and then
the more so I started looking into it
like are there a lot of people saying
this and I just haven't heard it and
there are a lot of people now whether
you guys are right or I have no idea
just go just Google um um fluoride
poison study the national toxicology
program this is from the okay they did a
systemic review of the scientific
research on flid exposure um can you
blow that up yeah I was going to say if
you can read this then damn I whatever
supplement you're on I need yeah I'm 53
and neurod deenal and cognitive function
health effects in human uh blah blah
blah blah based on with Hazard
classification this study will actually
talk about the inverse relationship in
3,200 municipalities it will talk about
the inverse relationship between
fluoride and IQ so that as fluoride
actually went up IQ actually went down
drinking water as fluoride in the
drinking water went up um IQ went down
the national toxicology study actually
looked at 3200 water municipalities and
we know that fluoride is neurotoxic but
they looked at 3200 um municipalities in
these 3200 municipalities they found an
inverse relationship between the amount
of fluoride and IQ MH so as the amount
of fluoride in the drinking water per
municipality went up the IQ actually
went down especially in prepubescent
tees it talked especially about the
incidence of iQ going down in
prepubescent teens I I'll find it for
you and we'll we'll link it to the
podcast so we don't have to spend all
the time but I I will find that rep I
actually used it one of my um one of my
reports that I did you know just a
one-on-one with the camera um and again
I'm not trying to like sound the alarm
but if you have the if you have the
possibility of filtering your water and
not drinking fluide in your water and
also chlorine and microplastics and
pharmaceuticals um then for sure tap
water is one of the things I think that
you should permanently get out of your
life like I also think you should
permanently get genetically modified
foods out of your life yeah that one all
right so we're definitely going to talk
about these let's close the loop on
cholesterol chol so um so I I would vly
disagree with him and I'd love to see
the research that he's referring to
let's get
specific so in in the mortality space
and we had we you know this is mortality
is based on on a pool of large data
right so um when when we would predict a
life expectancy it wouldn't be like if I
predicted your life expectancy and it
said Tom you had 272 months to live it
didn't mean in 27 2 months you were
dropped dead it meant in 272 months you
had an exact same chance of being alive
as you did of being dead it was the
center of the bell curve right it was
the it was the median uh life expectancy
and then to move you to one side of the
curve or to the other we would look at
specific risk factors one of which was
your LDL cholesterol over time and this
was based on a pool of 370 Million Lives
it is the largest population database in
the world so so if you had low levels of
triglyceride and slightly elevated LDL
cholesterol low density lipoprotein this
was a marker for
Longevity if you had elevated
triglyceride and low um and high LDL it
was a marker for cardiovascular disease
so when you talk about markers for
cardiovascular disease you cannot look
at LDL in a vacuum it is not a linear
correlation between increased LDL and
increased risk of cardiovascular dise
that is absolutely patently false if you
have increased LDL cholesterol and you
have increased levels of triglyceride
your mortality rate skyrockets if you
have increased levels of LDL cholesterol
and low triglyceride your El uh your um
incidence of cardiovascular disease
plummets so there is no linear
correlation between LDL cholesterol on
its own and cardiovascular disease and
that's what I said that from an
insurance uh predictive model
perspective an insurance predictive
model that was based on actual mortality
right so like we had data fast before
you go down that I I want people to
understand because this is something
that people seem to be very confused
about that you bring up a lot so
um what people hear you say is that uh I
can predict your Tom B you I can predict
your death within a month
right what you just said which is
hopefully you can this out and play it
around that what you're actually saying
is the models simply predict when you're
going to hit the center of that you're
as likely to be alive as dead this is
statistical over a whole lot of people
this is not an individual's life this is
plugging in risk factors figuring out
what risk factors you have and where
that would put you on this bell curve of
alive or dead and it's interesting
because you've said something I heard
Elon Musk say which makes a lot lot of
sense to me which is if you really want
to know whether something matters or not
look at what the insurance companies do
and I think he was saying that in
reference to whether um the vaccines
have any sort of impact on heart disease
and he was just
like watch watch what the interest com
now I may be wrong about that I want to
be very clear I don't want to misquote
him talking about sorry can you also go
to Fano FAS o and Associates just pull
up that website this is the largest life
expectancy prediction company in in in
the country so this wasn't just work
that I did see how it says our um our
Specialties include life expectancies
just go down and it will show you that
they do life expectancy predictions for
um annuities for reverse mortgages for
life insurance this is some of the most
accurate science in the world I mean if
you think about um and and they actually
put their um the accuracy data for their
life expectancies on here how close to
the median bell curve prediction were
they how how far off of the standard
deviation so they're publishing their
data on or making available if you're a
subscriber or however they monetize they
make those risk factor clusters known
and like hey if you smoke and you drink
and you're sedentary you're going to be
dead at exactly so when you look at life
expect and I'm glad we're actually going
to get into this because I've never
really had a chance to defend that like
when I gave data white 10.4 years to
live and by the way I've only done life
expectancy for one person since I left
that industry almost years ago and it
was Dana White I don't want to be known
for being the guy that predicts life
expectancy anymore I don't even use that
database any longer but so emotionally
powerful that while I get it's actually
just a statistical proxy I understand
why the world has glommed on to this um
and I think it behooves people in fact
let me just do a PSA really fast I think
it behooves everybody especially those
people that I love that know that they
are living a lifestyle that is not good
to see hey if you do these behaviors
it's going to have this impact on your
life now why do I say this as a guy Who
develops video games for a living I'm
telling you right now anything that you
can gamify the reason I wear an aura
ring is it lets me gamify my sleep I
suddenly care because I can adjust my
score and it's fun so true and if you
can and Dana talked about this in the
interview you did with him he's like oh
starting to feel better and knowing what
my blood levels are that correlates how
I feel is fun I like doing it I like
trying to optimize my blood and so in
business they always say what gets
measured gets improved yeah and so I
think it's good even though it's just a
statistical proxy it is not your destiny
it is not saying that you actually are
going to die this day in a car accident
or from lung cancer or whatever right
it's just saying hey people that have
these patterns statistically end up with
this outcome so one it's good and by the
way it's very accurate so I I I don't
want to like downplay it either you know
these these life expectancies are
extraordinarily accurate if you look at
I mean if you want to know how good life
insurance companies are at predicting
mortality just look at what happened in
the 2008 2009 Financial Services profit
margins don't they have a legal
obligation to pay out 91% they have a
well I mean 98% of all life insurance
never pays a death claim 98% of all life
insurance policies laps only 2% of life
insurance policies actually pay a death
claim whoa 98% of all life insurance
policies Labs well that's why they
didn't go out of business yeah that's
why they didn't go pay for a while and
then stop yeah so when we had what 364
Banks fail you didn't have one life
insurance company fail not one that
doesn't tell me that their data is good
it tells me that 98% of people lapse
their policy and they're just raking in
the money well when where where their
data gets good is that they they the the
data that they have which doesn't exist
in other clinical studies or Hospital
chains or or research foundations for
universities is that they know the day
the date the time the location and the
cause of death for 370 Million Lives or
maybe even more basically they've
created an AI model that predicts how
and when you're going to and they can
pull and they can pull that in and so
there there are there are what we call
mortality factors right there credits
and there's debits and then there's
something called comorbidities right so
you're on a Bel you're on an actual
curve I'm on an actual curve everybody
in this room is on one right how dare
you how dare you I'm gonna live forever
Gary didn't you know you can defy the
odds but you're on one brother so it's
like okay you're 37y old male you have a
life expectancy of X so bang but the the
life insurance company doesn't care
where you are on an actual ra curve M
right they want your specific mortality
before they put 50 million or $75
million worth of risk on your life
because if they do only one thing
matters do they DNA test they do
now yeah that's a little scary yeah they
do now do I love that or do I hate that
as an entrepreneur I love it because it
means that you can get better as a
person that may want a life insurance
policy at some point I hate it that's
interesting yeah I mean I I was allowed
you know in that underwriting Department
you could you could get a blood test
once but pretty much any blood marker
that you wanted so if you wanted to see
if if their chances of something that
was chronic becoming non-chronic or you
wanted to for example um you know we
would see vast amount of misdiagnosis in
medical records and that's what I did I
didn't get my knowledge even from the
eight years of undergrad that or
undergrad and grad school I went to I
went to um undergraduate for biology I
went to grad school for human biology so
I have another four-year degree in human
biology where I really got the majority
of my knowledge was from Reading medical
records eight hours a day five or six
days a week for almost 20 years all I
did was do medical record extraction
when you start reading that voluminous
amount of medical record you start to
see how the practice of medicine is done
and you start to see the patterns in the
practice of medicine and you start to
see the downside because you see the
number of misdiagnoses that are going on
or patients that have simple nutrient
deficiencies like vitamin D3 are
diagnosed with rheumatoid arthritis put
on a corticosteroid which eats their
joints over the next six years causes
them to have a joint replacement and
then reduces their Mobility what we call
your ambulatory profile and then brings
in all of the diseases from further down
your future that exacerbate with reduced
mobility and and you find that so many
of these things methotraxate that they
put people on for um um you know
arthritic conditions which gives you
MTHFR gene mutation that you didn't have
shuts down the ability for your body to
use folate and turn it into methylfolate
creating this Mass massive deficiency
and initially it's put into your body to
be anti-inflammatory but now it actually
shuts your gut down disrupts your mood
you know begins to cause contents in
your gut to purify um and and and you
develop not only gut issues which is the
primary result of these um
Pharmaceuticals but you also start to to
get um mood disorders and personality
alterations because you now are creating
a deficiency in the body that you didn't
otherwise create the same thing by the
way we would see in cholesterol Statin
medications prolonged use of statins
suppressing cholesterol which is a
construction material not a fuel source
it is a construction material that we
use to make every cell wall every cell
membrane and every hormone in the human
body when we start to deplete these fuel
sources you would begin to see
significant hormone disrupt
um and and other consequences down down
down the line of overs supressing
cholesterol in the body you see the same
thing in in psychiatric medications the
studies are being published now that we
actually saw the damage from um during
my career and that is that you know we
knew that people that were on
anti-depressants for prolonged periods
of time had significantly higher rates
of suicide and nobody was talking about
it they had significantly more severe
depression when they got off they
reported massive what they would call
crushing depression after prolonged use
of anti-depressants and prolonged use of
anti-depressants they would start to go
into their their primary care and their
psychiatrist and complain that they were
actually starting to have Suicidal
Thoughts Suicidal Thoughts that were
leading them to certain actions and you
would see this in the medical record
because the patient history would be in
there um and so you you you saw this
voluminous amount of not just medical
misdiagnosis but this voluminous amount
of um modifiable risk factors that were
in the mortality prediction so you put
somebody onto a bell curve and now we're
trying to decide are they going to dive
earlier than their average population or
they going to die later than their
average population and so you start to
take away what's called mortality debits
they have diabetes they're hypertensive
they're morbidly obese um and each one
of those would give you a debit but if
you had all three of those in the same
biome they would get a massive debbit
because being morbidly obese type two
diabetic and hypertensive in the same
body is way worse than having any one of
those conditions on their own so these
were called comorbidities and they would
dramatically accelerate your rate of
death right they would move you way to
the left of the bell curve and what was
astounding was that the majority of
these factors that were moving people
from the center of the bell curve of the
mortality curve to the left meaning they
were going to die earlier this was
called the mortality multiplier the
statistical chance that they would die
before the mean right this called the
mortality multiplier what was moving
people to the left were modifiable risk
factors meaning had I just been able to
get on the phone and contact that person
I could have made a dramatic change in
life the standard ones smoking being
sedentary loss of muscle mass smoking
being sedentary loss of muscle mass I
mean there you know clearly sarcopenia
age related muscle wasting which is why
you hear a lot of people say say if you
want to live a long time lift heavy
weight that's actually very very true
but things like um like you would see
anemia for example um is this a super
common one super common people are
anemic and why are they anemic as
they're getting older um even yes as
they're getting older but it's getting
into younger and younger ages in people
in their ear early 50s late 40s mid 40s
are having hormone imbalance and why are
they having hormone imbalances not
because their hormones are necessarily
um their testicles for example have lost
the ability to secrete testosterone but
because they have deficiencies in things
like DHEA and vitamin D3 building blocks
of the building blocks right like
remember we talked about earlier that we
said um you know a lot of reasons why
people will come into one of our clinics
right um and is they'll say I'm low on
energy so when somebody says I'm low on
energy we just convert that to
physiology if you tell me you're low on
energy what you're really saying is I'm
low on oxygen right and so if you're low
on oxygen one of the consequences I mean
one of the one of the causes of being
low on oxygen is being low on red blood
cells and being low on hemoglobin right
not anemic but this hides in plain sight
right because a red blood cell carries
oxygen inside of a fluid called
hemoglobin so when your red blood cell
count is in the lower cortile but it's
still normal and your hemoglobin is in
the lower cortile but it's still normal
this starts to compound meaning it
starts to reduce the oxidative state in
the blood you're carrying less oxygen
well if you go to the place in the body
where where red blood cells and
hemoglobin are made it's the bone marrow
right so how do I get the bone marrow to
produce more red blood cells which would
raise my energy level you go to the boss
of the bone marrow which is the hormone
testosterone if you look at one of in
men and women in men and women one of
the primary roles of testosterone is
your rrop poesis to put pressure on the
bone marrow to create new red blood
cells this is why very often when men
start hormone therapy testosterone
injections they have to do regular blood
donations right because the bone marrow
spits out so many red blood cells that
the blood begins to thicken it raises
something called their hematocrit level
it raises their blood viscosity so I
would see in the medical record man this
this person is basically walking around
anemic in plain sight their red blood
cell count is right in the bottom quart
tile or bottom 10 percentile their
hemoglobin level is super super low
they're low on the hormone testost they
have no DHEA they have no vitamin D3 and
they're exhausted and when they're
exhausted they also can't sleep and as
soon as the exhaustion would affect the
sleep then we would start to increase
the rate of the debits because why is it
that people that are most exhausted
sleep the
worst you know when you ask a doctor why
is it that most people the people that
are the most exhausted sleep the worse
because you would think it would be the
opposite right you would think that
people that are really exhausted the one
thing they would do really well is sleep
but the truth is it's because they're
both related to blood oxygen why are you
tired because you're low on blood oxygen
well what happens when you lay down to
go to bed at night your respiratory rate
starts to fall as your respiration rate
starts to fall the amount of oxygen
coming into your blood starts to drop
eventually the amount of blood oxygen
gets to a critical level as you're going
into a Delta wave of sleep and as you
start to go into that Delta wave of
sleep your brain panics and it wakes you
up up how does it wake you up it pulses
cortisol right so if you actually look
at the AA ring of of somebody that has
low blood oxygen you'll see that they
look like a bouncing rubber ball going
down the hallway at night between what
modes light sleep and between Delta and
Alpha Beta And I'm not talking I don't
how to read an or ring in those ways it
just says light between light sleep and
deep sleep so deep sleep they'll bounce
off the ground what should it look like
should it look like you go light deep
stay deep deep light wake yes I mean
ideally what you would look like is you
fell off a cliff and you laid at the
bottom of the cliff for a while and then
you pop back out that is not what mine
looks like I worry that mine looks like
the bouncing ball you're describing not
I worry so I I bounce back and forth
between uh light so mine will go I fall
asleep fast I'll go light for pretty
brief then deep but then I'll pop back
up to light then deep then I'll go light
wake
then light deep light deep light and
then weight like blue and it gets white
and then it goes back down it looks
likee kind of yes I only hit white
usually once to twice a night but I
bounce back and forth between light and
deep so what's happening there so um
yours isn't happening because you're
exhausted but you know when people are
this is why people that go on hormone
therapy sometimes feel so good right
because what happens is when we
normalize the level or optimize the
level of testosterone and if you
actually want to look at at the studies
on this you can go to the 2018 Journal
of American Urology so you see here that
um clinicians so this is this is
according to the this is the Bible by
the way let me just read this clinician
should inform testosterone deficient
patients that low testosterone is a risk
factor for cardiovascular dis a risk
factor for cardiovascular disease not
the other way around evidence there is
strong evidence so in other words if I'm
your doctor and for record I'm not a
doctor I'm a human biologist but if I'm
your doctor and you're low on
testosterone what should I inform you
will happen if you get on hormone
therapy well first I should I always
thought I wanted to leave my
testosterone alone as long as humanly
possible you do this is why sort of I
want to get it up if it's low you want
to get it up if it's low by giving your
body the raw material to make it on its
own so you want to look at your DHEA
level your vitamin D3 level and you want
to look at a very specific protein in BL
I get DHEA just pull DHE on your blood
now how do I eat it um how do I consume
it um well you know the best way is to
supplement with it but um you can get di
hydr epiandrosterone from certain
cruciferous vegetables but a 100
thousand years ago I wouldn't have been
able to supplement so what would I do
Che the bark of a Tre Cru vegetables
interesting yeah um we're have to go
into carnivore versus vegan at some
point here yeah I mean that's I'm I'm
ready are you a vegan no
oh philosophical thing I just want
what's
um carnivore is very effective um but
you just said to eat cruciferous
vegetables to avoid low testosterone
yeah but you could also eat um grass-fed
Meats I mean grass-fed meats and I'll
give you a whole we can we can talk
about grass-fed meats eggs raw dairy um
you know pasture raised chickens you
know pasture raised eggs the again the
problem is not the it's not the meat
it's the it's the industrial processed
meat I mean grass-fed meat is excellent
for you so are pasture raised eggs in
fact the only thing when you of any
consequence when you're buying eggs is
that they should be pasture raised not
that they're cage-free because that just
means that chicken's out of the cage
when they feed worms and bugs you want
to eat in worms bugs in Grass I mean
just like when a cow eats grass it
doesn't just eat the grass it actually
gets soil it actually gets minerals you
know zinc magnesium nutrients from the
soil but if you see here patients should
be informed that testosterone therapy
may result in improvements in erectile
function low sex drive anemia bone
mineral density lean body mass Andor
depressive symptoms are you tracking
Brian Johnson at all yes so he's all
about his uh erection
Rejuvenation uh I actually don't know
his protocol do you know what is he
doing is it a
testosterone so the that he does that
I'm I'm really a big fan of and I won't
say that I know I understand everything
that's going on in his blueprint um I
actually did a Pierce Morgan show about
him the other day because they were like
oh he's a complete charlatan I go he's
not a charl yeah I mean well this was
like Lord Winston who was on this
program from from the UK do you remember
Lord Winston he was so I mean the guy
looked like he was actually about to
have a stroke so I was going to say like
unless johnon like he's 18 I mean
shredded he looks great I think what
he's doing is amazing real life because
what he's done reminds me of you in some
ways now that I'm getting to know you
wish he's like aging backwards well not
in that sense but the discipline because
what he's done the major thing that he's
accomplished which I think you could
probably do too is he has removed
himself entirely from the equation he
does not make any decisions what he eats
what he supplements with what he drinks
the amount of fluid he intakes
everything is based on data so he
doesn't eat when he feels like eating he
doesn't um eat in a particular window he
doesn't eat a particular food although
his is his is vegan based but but um or
an plant-based um but the amount of
protein carboh hydrates all of his
macros his micros every supplement that
he has competes for its life in in you
know testing so he's looking at his
hemoglobin A1c his glycemic profile his
nutrient deficiencies his hormone
balance and then essentially his
exercise and his diet and his hydration
are specifically tailored to specific
biomarkers so he is constantly tapping
those those biomarkers now I don't know
how much Imaging he's doing because
obvious VI ly the too much Imaging is
actually really bad for you um but I
know that he does dexa scans and I know
he does MRIs and he does other types of
Imaging to look at body mass index and
specifically visceral and body fat
ratios of brown fat to white fat I think
what he's doing is he's proving what is
possible you know nobody is gonna say
I'm gonna be that psycho disiplined I
won't say nobody so Brian Johnson is a
glimpse seven years from now into the
future where you have uh CGM type device
that you put on the back of your arm and
it feeds data to your AI that if I have
anything to do with it you'll have an
interface with right uh and that AI W
personality and it will tell you you
should eat now and you should eat these
exact things and don't worry I've
ordered I've told the fridge to order
you know whatever and it's going to be
there and ready for you and based on
your blood you should be eating this
drinking this that I cannot stress
enough that is not science fiction that
will happen barring world World War II
that sends us all back into the Stone
Age that's going to happen oh I believe
that but I'm saying when you look at the
Practical nature of okay travel like you
just said you know I went to London I
went to Dubai came from Dubai back to LA
you know that sort of thing makes it
hard when you're in your home home
environment and you have this AI that is
feeding you the exact meals now maybe
when you travel it can tell you exactly
what to eat and where to eat and maybe
locate the restaurant for you something
like that um but practically to do what
he's doing even if you had AI figuring
it all out for you while you're here in
your own home and you have access to
those certain nutrients but when you
know when you're living your life it's
going to be hard I think to do that AI
or not I think most people won't even be
able to do it in their home that's the
more terrifying part um but it is very
exciting to me as a person that has that
kind of discipline to know that that
data is racing it way towards us he's
the bleeding edge for sure and even I'm
not going to spend $2 million a year on
it I I would have to be guaranteed that
it would have the outcome that I want um
there's too many question marks right
now but so anyway going back to
testosterone predictor and this was
nested inside of the larger prediction
engine so so so let's go back to so now
we talked about red blood cell and
hemoglobin were're low um we we looked
at the hormone levels so let's say the
testosterone is low um because we went
to the bone marrow and we said okay the
bone marrow is not making enough red
blood cells and making enough hemoglobin
why not well now we look at the hormone
testosterone testosterone is low it's
one of its primary roles is uthr poesis
putting pressure on the bone marrow so
now the question is don't just replace
the hormone why is testosterone low well
the next thing I would look at would be
three factors I would look at your DHEA
level your vitamin vegetables or
grass-fed beef M grass-fed beef my
preference would be grass-fed uh
grass-fed U beef and uh grass-fed beef
chicken eggs um raw dairy um but
non-pasteurized non-homogenized raw A2
Dairy and then um and then you take it a
step lower there's a protein in the
blood called shbg sex hormone binding
globulin and this protein when it rises
it actually does exactly what its name
sounds like and it binds to sex hormones
primarily testosterone and it will lower
the level of free testosterone in your
blood so again very often what happens
is nutrient deficiencies Drive
deficiencies in things like hormones
deficiencies in hormone Drive
deficiencies in bone marrow production
of red blood cell and hemoglobin which
Drive deficiencies in oxygen which
essentially lead to the deficiency in
energy which is exactly why you see
these kinds of comments in the Journal
of American Urology which again I would
consider one of the Bibles for male
endocrine therapy um that um that um you
know things like fatigue the the the
risk factor for cardiovascular disease
even the implications that hormone
therapy could increase the incidence of
thrombolytic events Strokes heart
attacks cardiovascular risk that's all
been um debunked here and they actually
cite the evidence for that and I don't
think that there's a practicing
physician today that wouldn't say that
the Journal of American Urology is one
of the Bibles for male endocrine therapy
so just back to this data for a moment
so now people that are deficient in
vitamin D3 deficient in DHEA and have
this excess protein called
shbg these are not massive these are not
diseases these are not pathologies these
are nutrients in the human body very
simple to fix what is the consequence
the consequence is low hormones low red
blood cell count low hemoglobin what's
the consequence of that very poor sleep
very poor energy poor um focus and
concentration poor short-term recall
weight gain water retention a very poor
response to exercise slow recovery um
you know so you have all this Myriad of
things that are coming from pretty
simple nutrient deficiencies and again
we would see this in the medical record
I'm like well this person doesn't really
need hormone therapy they just need DHEA
and vitamin D3 this person doesn't need
to be given injections of testosterone
they need to get this protein lowered so
we we don't study human beings the same
way that we study plants we don't say
well let's add Nitro nitrogen to the
soil and let the the tree rebound we
just say well the disease is in the leaf
so let's replace the leaf or cut it off
and the same thing happens in take
vitamin D3 deficiency it compromises the
immune system you get repeated um viral
infections you get repeated bacterial
infections which further com compromise
the immune system because a lot of viral
pathogens in the human body are
opportunistic right like Epstein bar
virus you don't catch Epstein bar virus
you always had it it was mono that you
had as a child that came back in your
40s as Epstein bar because you ran the
immune system down chickenpox that you
as a child comes back as shingles you
didn't actually catch shingles you've
always had it so now all of a sudden
you're starting to have a compromised
immune system because a com of a
compromised nutrient deficiency and
because of this compromised immune
system you're getting repeated viral
infections and now you're taking either
repeated antivirals or repeated
antibiotics which is now destroying the
gut so again my whole point is that we
should come full circle back to the
human body and say first what nutrient
efficiency could be causing this
consequence right because if you take
the majority of people with low
testosterone that are also clinically
deficient in DHEA and vitamin D3 and I
have thousands of patient records to
prove this um you know I have more than
20 how many how many clinicians do we
have working for us now 22 we have 22
full-time licensed clinicians that work
work for me fulltime and and you go back
into their record and you look at what
what happens when we just put D3 and
DHEA into their bodies that's it just
gave them vitamin D3 back into the
optimal range gave them DHEA back into
the optimal range their hormone levels
return to normal their red blood cell
count in hemoglobin Rose into the
optimal range and the consequence for
them was better focus better
concentration improve sleep and improve
waking energy not hormone therapy not
fancy sleeping pills no chemicals no
synthetics no Pharmaceuticals just the
deficiency that was missing from the
body that was causing it to not behave
optimally okay so thinking about all of
this through the lens of wanting people
to want to know which where on the
Actuarial curve they fall what their
predicted mortality is um you talk a lot
you talk about two separate things but I
rarely hear you bring them together so
you've got um protocols sleep red light
uh earthing that and then you've got
nutrient deficiency MH uh help me bring
them together okay is it does this um
database that unfortunately is never
going to see the light of day that
you've said would just absolutely
destroy medicine I forget the words you
use it would just upend modern medicine
in a way that would be catastrophic
because we' when you say catastrophic
you mean it would end that industry
because people would realize drugs don't
solve it yes would you would realize the
true consequences of of a lot of the
Pharmaceuticals that are out there right
now got it the true consequence of mRNA
vaccines and and you know the additional
production of Spike proteins You' see
the two true Consequence the Genesis of
what happens with long-term Statin use
you'd see the inappropriate use of a lot
of beta blockers calcium channel
blockers and diuretics which are
actually targeting the heart when the
heart isn't the issue it's the vascular
system you'd see the consequences of
long-term use of things like
levothyroxine and Synthroid that are
pounding on perfectly healthy organs for
crime s that they're not committing
because the issue is actually
methylation of thyroid hormones outside
of the thyroid not the actual thyroid
itself I mean if you want to talk about
a pandemic in this country we have a
pandemic of medicating
organs for crimes that they didn't
commit and we are doing that because we
have a system that has a pill for every
ill we're not looking for root cause
analysis we are addressing the symptom
rather than the cause we're addressing
because because there's in symptom
management there's a multi-billion
dollar industry in disease prevention
there is no multi-billion dollar
industry I mean look at type 2 diabetes
it's
a$0 billion doll annual industry do you
think there are meetings going on
somewhere in big farmer right now to say
hey let's find a way to put that out of
business it's $1 110 billion do annual
industry the SSRI business um the um
opiate business the business of and I'm
not just saying that that these do not
have a specific Place nor am I saying
that there's this Sinister motive to try
to kill everybody but what I'm saying is
we don't look at human beings with the
thought that this body could heal itself
if it had the raw material to do its job
look at the number of people that are on
hypothyroid medication well if you look
at the thyroid production of thyroid
hormones the thyroid produces all of the
thyroid hormone T4 but it only produces
20% of the thyroid hormone T3 yet we use
thyroid hormone T3 to diagnose
hypothyroid well if people are low on
thyroid T3 there's an 80% chance it's
not the thyroid but what do we do in
100% of the cases almost we medicate the
thyroid we're holding the thyroid
responsible for a crime it's not
committing so the question is where do
the other 80% of the thyroid come from
it is methylated in the gut we take
thyroid hormone to T4 and we methylate
it into thyroid hormone T3 so why don't
we look to the gut to get put the
nutrients into the gut to start
converting thyroid hormones before we
start standing on the thyroid
synthetically you can reboot your life
your health even your career anything
you want all you need is discipline I
can teach you the tactics that I learned
while growing a billion doll business
that will allow you to see your goals
through whether you want better health
stronger relationships a more successful
career any of that that as possible with
the mindset and business programs in
Impact Theory University join the
thousands of students who have already
accomplished amazing things tap now for
a free trial and get started
today if 85% of all um hypertension
diagnosis people with hypertension high
blood pressure are diagnosed with
idiopathic hypertension or what we call
primary or essential hypertension they
all mean the same thing if 85% of these
are of Unknown Origin
then why don't we start looking for the
origin in certain nutrient deficiencies
why don't we actually look to see if the
vascular system is over constricted
because of homocysteine when we start to
look at rheumatoid arthritis why why are
we not doing specific test said rates
and ra factors to determine whether or
not something H somebody has this
autoimmune condition um versus just
taking the symptoms that they have and
putting them on something like a
corticosteroid and I could go on and on
and on I'm not not saying that these
medications don't have their place they
are just so dramatically
overused because we have lost faith in
the body's ability to heal itself and we
don't go hunting for nutrient
deficiencies and so let's put all of
these tests together like you said you
know I do a genetic test on on on people
or my clinics do genetic tests you don't
have to get the genetic test through me
but there are plenty of really really
good genetic tests but there is a
genetic methylation test I think every
human being should do once in their life
time why because you only have to do the
test once you do that test once you will
never guess again on what your body can
convert and what it can't and then you
can supplement for deficiency see your
your aversion to supplementing is is is
rightfully found because you would be
supplementing just for the sake of
supplementing if you just started taking
a bunch of great supplements but if you
knew that your body couldn't convert a
certain nutrient into the usable form
you should be a lot more comfortable
supplementing with just that that that
nutrient so that's what I'm saying I'm
not saying take a bunch of supplements
off the self shelf and just start
shoveling them in I'm saying get data do
a genetic test supplement for deficiency
and then use your blood work to track
whether or not that's working and in the
blood work there's about 74 biomarkers
that I look at there's plenty of clinics
that look at the same biomarkers they
are not ger meain to me nor are they nor
do I do anything incredibly special with
those biomarkers but I look at glycemic
control how well you control your blood
sugar which we talked about out um
hormone balance which is extraordinarily
important and nutrient deficiencies
things like D3 B12 and nutrient
deficiencies if you look at those three
categories I mean it would there would
be a massive shift in systemic pathology
and disease in this country if people
would supplement for deficiency and
monitor those three areas of their blood
orc that's the simple part and then of
course there's all kinds of fancy bio
hacking things that you can do but for
zero you can do breath work expose your
skin to sunlight touch the surface of
the Earth and take a cold shower there's
not a person listening to this podcast
no matter what their budget is that
couldn't add those four things to their
daily routine and it would change the
entire trajectory of their life right
yes my clinic manufacturers and we sell
very expensive red light therapy beds
and pmf and oxygen and if you have the
budget to to purchase those things to
make life convenient great but it is not
a necessary part of you becoming an
ultimate human are becoming optimally
healthy you can do all of that on a very
very little budget and and then shifts
in in our diet don't actually have to be
shifts in the things that we like to eat
you know I do these things with with
clients all the time called lateral
shifts you know we'll go to the
refrigerator and I'll say okay let's
open up your refrigerator you show me
what you like to eat oh you like this
yogurt with fruit on the bottom this Dan
and yogurt with fruit on the bottom okay
this has high fructose goren syrup um
and it's got 54 grams of sugar whoa so
what we're going to do is we're just
going to take whole Fat Greek yogurt um
um we're going to you like the blueberry
flavor okay we're going to get organic
blueberries and then we're going to use
monk fruit and you're going to take a
scoop of you know a couple tablespoons
of whole Fat Greek yogurt you're going
to take a fist full of blueberries and
you're going to take a a teaspoon of
monk fruit and mix it up and you tell me
if you can tell the difference between
those two which you can't and this one
has an entirely different nutritional
profile than this one does with the corn
syrup and the fake fruit and and no fats
and virtually no protein and it's all
high glycemic carbohydrates this one has
healthy fats is low carbohydrate high
amounts of protein and still taste
exactly the the same and this is not a
massive shift in your budget it's just a
shift in your awareness of what you're
eating get things like seed oils out of
your diet genetically modified foods
because the evidence on genetically
modified foods now is terrible that it
can act may actually even be altering
our own genome right and may actually
the these genetic Al modified organisms
may actually be negatively impacting our
own DNA altering our own DNA so I have a
quote from you the worst thing that ever
happened to us was genetically modified
foods I think it's one of why because we
are making non Foods out of foods and we
are doing an experiment on Humanity
right when we start genetically
modifying organisms in non-uropathogenic
know what the long-term consequences are
in the human body so if you look at the
research in 2009 and again if we I will
post this sequence of Articles 2009 2013
2023 I'll show you in 2009 how the
research the metaanalyses that were
going on on genetically modified foods
in 2009 because of they not their their
lack of prevalence was mainly in animal
studies and anecdotal anecdotal
correlations to human beings me meaning
this may have a detrimental effect um it
does AAR to be um causing certain
anomalies and in and rats and mice by
2013 they were like there is significant
evidence in animal studies that
genetically modified foods are having a
negative impact on our physiology
specifically liver and hepatic toxicity
um mental function early onset of things
like Alzheimer's and Dementia
specifically the neurofibrillary tangles
by the time you get to 2023 and we
actually had human clinical trials I
mean the there is direct evidence that
genetically modified foods are are not
only potentially modifying our DNA but
are are actually creating conditions in
the human body that are making us less
resistant to antibiotics how would it
modify our DNA the same way that when
you put synthetic messenger RNA like
look at the look at what we did with
vaccines right we used to use something
called an attenuated virus where we take
the nucleocapsid protein of a virus and
it had the DNA inside the envelope and
we would basically take the DNA out or
we render the DNA we would kill the DNA
so now you put this this viral envelope
into your body and your immune system
still sees this viral envelope and it
manufactures an antibody but without the
DNA it couldn't affect you right so this
is an attenuated virus and then all of a
sudden we started to use messenger RNA
well what is an mRNA vaccine well an
mRNA vaccine is taking a synthetic copy
of a message from your DNA and putting a
synthetic message into your body not
created by your DNA not sent from the
nucleus of your cell but synthetically
derived and that message gets into your
cell and it never shuts off remember DNA
has two major roles right if you look
inside the nucleus of the cell you
you've got the DNA the boss right it has
two major roles one is replication it
creates an exact copy of itself the
other one is transcription where it's
writing messages into the cytoplasm of
the cell right you throw this nutrient
out you bring this nutrient in you make
this protein well those messages are
called
mRNA so if you take one of those
messages and you synthetically recreate
it right a normal mRNA lasts two to
maybe 12 hours a synthetic message may
not ever break down so now if you're a
minion in the cell and I'm the DNA and I
write you a message and I say go make
this protein Tom and you go make the
protein you come back to the desk and I
go go make the protein you come back to
the desk go make the protein come back
go make the protein normally that
message wouldn't be on your desk when
you got back from completing that task
when it's a synthetic mRNA that message
never degrades you keep making protein
not die with the cell not if it's
synthetic it will go into the next cell
because remember part of the cell's life
cycle through mitosis and meiosis is to
duplicate right so it can pass on
synthetic messenger RNA if it passed on
um organic messenger RNA then yes that
message would degrade but when you pass
on a synthetic message from cytoplasm to
cytoplasm it doesn't degrade in the Next
Generation so now the Next Generation
starts picking up that message then it
divides again and the Next Generation
starts picking up that message now I
don't profess to be an expert in mRNA
vaccines but I know enough about human
physiology to say if you make a
synthetic copy of the message from the
DNA that doesn't degrade and the protein
sequence never shuts off we keep making
all of this Spike protein Spike protein
Spike protein and that leaves the cell
and it enters the serum of the blood and
then it beds itself into the arterial
wall and you start to get reduced you
start to impair the the bloodb brain
barrier so that nutrients in the the
blood can't leave the blood and enter
the tissue and and contents from the
tissue waste waste can't be eliminated
from the tissue back into the blood now
you get this whole strange Myriad of
symptoms right you look at the scans on
these people they have something called
diffuse vasculitis or Donia these people
people that have been vaccinated and
multiple boosted with with mRNA that
have high amounts of Spike protein um in
in their bloods and their their arterial
wall um you you you can see something
called diffuse vasculitis or Donia
vasculitis where you have an
inflammation in the lining of the blood
vessel right you have 63,000 miles of
blood vessel in your body if you start
interrupting that blood brain barrier
just think of contents in the blood
trying to get that can't reach the
tissue and waste from the tissue that
can't get back into the blood and so
that's with messenger RNA I think one of
the worst things that happened to us was
genetically modified foods some of the
some of the nutritional content that we
find in genetically modified foods is
exactly just that it is the the macros
in the GMO wheat but when you actually
look at the absorption rate of the
macros it's virtually zero so now we're
making genetically modified food that
the body doesn't recognize as food and
it can't draw any nutrients from it so
eating is not about just being full
eating is about actually being able to
have bioavailable nutrients I'm having a
hard time tracking something here so uh
the MRNA thing I understood as a
standalone item though I don't get a
synthetic version doesn't degrade but
we'll set aside that for a second least
synthetic I don't know why that would
inherently mean that it doesn't degrade
given the limited thing that I know
about cells and instructions in cells
you've got uh the instructions are being
read off and it does whatever the
instructions tell it to do but if that
cell gets flagged for deletion because
it's cessant because it's uh telr have
gotten short and so it's on
self-destruct mode I don't understand
how how or why unless that cell inside
of it I'm a lay person I want to be very
clear about that but why that uh cancer
cells are cells that no longer listen to
instructions so the way I'm
understanding what you're saying is that
this has a uh like a cancer cell that
refuses to die or be told to stop
producing replicating whatever I guess
you're not saying that it it continues
to replicate it continues to produce
Spike protein but it's not dying I don't
all of this has to be a set of
instructions right yes and it's a set of
instructions it's not producing the
spike protein it's the message to to
produce the spike protein corre so so
when you when you look at a cell when it
goes through what's called mitosis where
it actually creates a perfect copy of
itself yes as it goes from being a um
one cell into mitotically dividing into
two cells um it's not just the organic
matter that would divide it would be the
inorganic messenger RNA that would also
pass into that new cell but itelf
divides or are you saying that one
single thing just keeps moving the cell
continues to move got it what what is it
about that that stops itself from being
terminated because it's a it's it's
synthetic it's not a it's not a
biodegradable like think about a piece
of plastic right so for examp
when but a piece of plastic is going to
have an organic structure that has a
reason why it can't be broken down
unless you create a certain bacteria or
whatever that's designed to break that
thing down so that I understand it comes
down the physical heard forever
chemicals like they say there're certain
forever chemicals like okay so a forever
chemical is one that gets into the body
that the body doesn't recognize it can't
metabolize it can't break it down turn
it into waste and get rid of it because
it doesn't have an enzyme or a mechanism
to break it down yep so synthetic mRNA
is no different it's it's synthetic so
it's it's not like an organic messenger
that comes from an organic strand of DNA
it's a synthetic strand so there's no
enzyme there's no mechanism for it to
actually biodegrade what is the
mechanism that's on a normal cell that's
missing from mRNA it's an organic um
message so it delivers the message and
then it is enzymatically dissolved the
body actually breaks that message down
uh so
I I don't understand this well enough to
know the Silver Bullet question to ask
but what I hear what it sounds like is
you don't know the mechanism of action
because what I'm trying to understand is
okay a normal cell how is it destroyed
yeah and then normal RNA how is it
destroyed and then what is it about this
synthetic mRNA that is absent or cloaked
or whatever that that blocks it so so
what would happen is normally messenger
or would leave the nucleus of the cell
an mRNA message would leave the nucleus
of the cell and it would deliver an the
MRNA message or sorry the RNA message or
the the the RNA message y so the than
the thing the the actual RNA itself
right so the ribonucleic acid from the
DNA it reads a message from the DNA that
ribonucleic acid to parts and it's
called there's a little m in front of
ribonucleic acid because it's a message
so this ribonucleic acid leaves the
nucleus of the cell it enters the
cytoplasm of the cell and it gives an
instruction to an to a an organel in the
cell call it the endoplasm reticulum
that instruction is a sequence it's
usually an amino acid nucleotide
sequence y so when those amino acid
nucleotides
depart they now cause an action the
creation of a protein this is now
dissolved I mean the the that's the part
where I'm not so I'm tracking all that
makes sense so the Amo mRNA at that
moment the normal one the non-synthetic
the organic one has has a self-destruct
mechanism given it no it's given its
life to that message it's made up of a
sequin of nucleotides then the
nucleotides go out they bind why doesn't
that happen with the synthetic mRNA
because it is synthetic so it's a it's a
pretend copy of these it's the same
nucleotide sequence so
uh is it fair to say you don't know the
mechanism of action so I don't I don't
know why
specifically why the body doesn't break
it down other than it doesn't have the
enzymatic capacity to break it down so
there's something about the structure of
this
mRNA the body doesn't recognize need to
break this down CU you're saying the
other one gives its life I'm just trying
to figure out why this one doesn't give
us life anyway this feels like a dead
end um okay so uh we will round found it
to uh that at least as of right now
because I'm guessing there are not a lot
of studies on this certainly not
longitudinal that's the whole beef that
people that are upset with the
non-safety uh checks and balances with
operation warp
speed uh so we don't know here's what
what we should be asking for is there a
study showing
when synthetic mRNA is no longer
detectable body yes question but that St
not exist right okay uh now we got onto
that tangent from why GMOs are horrible
so that the statement that it may edit
our DNA makes the prediction that we're
absorbing something that has a
virus-like quality mhm what is it about
what GMOs specifically have a virus like
quality I've never heard that before
only because I'm woful uneducated on
GMOs I will say I don't remember the
specific study that I um but what I will
commit to do is put that study into I'll
give that study to you and I'll put it
into because this is very recent
evidence this was a 2023 article um uh
clinical study that I read on
genetically modified foods that
essentially said that there is evidence
now that certain genetically modified
foods these these sequences are having
negative impact on our DNA meaning that
they're actually affecting the way that
DNA replication is working because I
have not delve deeply into this I have
base assumptions that may be wildly
inaccurate with that disclosure I will
just tell you where my current map of
the situation is right now uh that our
ability to produce enough food that is
resilient to weather uh pesticides
phosphates is really the the way that
we're able to feed the GL globe on as
little real estate as we have is through
the Ingenuity that we've shown through
um genetically modifying the crops to be
either uh a more um to have higher
nutrient value or not really I I'd love
to see where they're genetically
modifying them to increase nutrient
first give my map or yield I'll just
give you because that was going to be my
next one I'll give you my map this could
all be wrong yeah because I'm trying to
to lay out what what I the the
assumptions that I have currently as a
lay person uh so that I can find the
edges of my map onto how this could be
getting in and editing people's DNA uh
so one I with the base assumption that I
have that we would not be able to
support the current population with
non-GMO foods which again could be wrong
I'm immediately going to be like Whoa We
need to look very closely at this now
I'm well aware that like Europe is super
skeptical I think Russia has like
outlawed in Russia sure there are people
that are like hey this is like
absolutely terrible
100%
too labar meets now having uh said that
I'm well aware that that all just may be
ignorance on my part but um we have
modified foods in my understanding not
because we're trying to send in a
virus-like thing that can be absorbed by
the gut and then actually remains active
despite digestion which I don't think so
either
I don't think that it's a Sinister
origin that we're genetically they do it
on purpose I just don't even understand
how how a food could can uh be
metabolized by my microbes in my gut
cross the epithelial lining get into my
bloodstream in a way that like a virus
then goes in and actually Snips the code
of my DNA the way that we either a virus
would do or I think it's do we sometimes
do that with bacteria crisper cast is
that virus or bacterial yeah crisper is
actually physical I mean it's that's the
only way to edit DNA right it would have
to be going in and snipping and yeah
unless it's epigenetic and snip it or or
or could be a chemical influence I mean
a lot of chemicals are not necessarily
snipping the DNA but what they're doing
is they're blocking The Binding
sequences so um if you look at the
cytosine glycine glycine sequences or
the sequences that actually Stitch DNA
together that would it be a more
accurate statement to say that it
influences gene expression it influences
gene expression yes that because when
that understand food not modifying the
DNA but it but you're you're essentially
having the same effect if you're keeping
the if you're keeping either the DNA
replicator cycle or the DNA
transcription cycle its ability to send
messages if you're interrupting that
then you are interrupting the message
from the DNA you're modifying The genome
because you're modifying the message
from The genome so it's not just the the
rungs of the ladder but how those unzip
and zip these cgg sequences for example
the cytosine glycine glycine sequences
the the synthetic sequencies for example
some of the people that are pro lab um
leak theory in in in covid said hey
there are there are sequences stitching
these things together that do not occur
naturally in nature there's no mechanism
in the human body for a cyto glycin
glycin sequence to stitch two strands of
DNA together so it must be synthetic so
my my point is that DNA un unwinds and
rewinds and also sends messages if you
are having an epigenetic influence on
that by interrupting that communication
you could theoretically be impacting The
genome this stuff get see I think it's I
think it's
scary anytime that we start synthetic
ically modifying DNA and then putting it
into the body and saying well we don't
know that it's not harmful so we're just
going to do it stray away from the
basics at your own Peril yeah stray away
from the basics and stop really just
thinking that you're so sick and
pathologic and diseased I mean you may
just be nutrient
deficient really Gary this has been
amazing where can people follow along
with you uh they can follow me at
Instagram um uh or listen to the
ultimate human podcast anywhere that
they listen to their podcast Spotify um
Apple iTunes um or they can go to the
ultimate human.com utterly fascinating
uh speaking of things that are
fascinating if you haven't already be
sure to subscribe and until next time my
friends be legendary take care peace if
you like this interview with Gary Brea
be sure to check out this interview with
Peter AA the higher that level the
longer you're going to live there's no
finding in all of biology that is more
predictive of a person's length of life
than that specific number